[Amit Varma]: One of the great tragedies of life is that by the time we have lived long enough to gain
[Amit Varma]: wisdom, we are not young enough to do anything with it.
[Amit Varma]: This is why technology, from the Gutenberg press to your podcast app, is so marvellous.
[Amit Varma]: We have access to the wisdom of others.
[Amit Varma]: This is also why I love these long, rambling conversations I have.
[Amit Varma]: The point of the conversation is not always the subject that might have sparked it off,
[Amit Varma]: but instead what you get to learn in the digressions that you take through the side roads of someone's
[Amit Varma]: mind.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today has been a dear friend of mine for a couple of decades, and we have spent
[Amit Varma]: countless hours talking about many, many things.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, in this conversation, I learnt a lot about him that I hadn't known earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And I also got much food for thought about the world we live in, and about my own self.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioural
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Prem Panikkar, a legendary journalist who has been whipping up a storm
[Amit Varma]: in the media since the late 1980s.
[Amit Varma]: He's best known for his cricket writing and his ball-by-ball commentary for Rediff in
[Amit Varma]: the mid-1990s.
[Amit Varma]: My12 have been the first blog in the world.
[Amit Varma]: He's also been a managing editor at Rediff and Yahoo, and has taught both journalism
[Amit Varma]: and writing to countless young people.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, before recording this episode, I recorded a session on writing with Prem for
[Amit Varma]: the YouTube channel of Windowpane, the writing community that I run.
[Amit Varma]: That video will be released on Wednesday, March 24, three days from now.
[Amit Varma]: We spoke about sports writing and writing in general over there.
[Amit Varma]: But in this conversation, we didn't cover many of the subjects you'd associate with
[Amit Varma]: Prem.
[Amit Varma]: There is little talk of cricket and writing, and we spent just the last half an hour talking
[Amit Varma]: about journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, for the first two and a half hours, we discussed broader themes around life and
[Amit Varma]: art.
[Amit Varma]: And Prem shared a raw, intimate account of his life that I found both moving and inspiring.
[Amit Varma]: This conversation will always remain special for me.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to it, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Why should we read books?
[Amit Varma]: I can think of many reasons, but one is that they teach us how to live.
[Amit Varma]: To give you a sense of this, allow me to recommend an online course for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to the sponsors of this episode, The Great Courses Plus at thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: and check out a course called The Life Lessons from The Great Books, taught by J. Rufus Fears.
[Amit Varma]: Over 36 lectures, Dr. Fears will take you through life lessons contained in the works
[Amit Varma]: of Seneca, Shakespeare, Plato, Aristophanes, Orwell, and my childhood favourite, Dostoyevsky.
[Amit Varma]: That's just one of the many great courses on this aptly named site.
[Amit Varma]: The Great Courses Plus has a fantastic library of online courses from subjects ranging from
[Amit Varma]: music, math, cooking, history, political theory, and much else.
[Amit Varma]: They also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these courses, the same way
[Amit Varma]: you listen to podcasts, and it will cost you nothing.
[Amit Varma]: You get one month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, thegreatcoursesplus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right, unseen, thegreatcoursesplus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free
[Amit Varma]: access.
[Amit Varma]: It's time to start learning.
[Amit Varma]: Shreem, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Amit, they used to say that unless you've been profiled in the caravan, you haven't
[Guest]: arrived.
[Guest]: I think the modern version is unless you've appeared on an Amit Verma podcast, you don't
[Guest]: exist.
[Guest]: So thanks for having me again.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm very happy to have you and you have arrived in the past, you have been on a couple
[Amit Varma]: of episodes in the past.
[Amit Varma]: We did an episode ages ago on the state of the media.
[Amit Varma]: And we did, there was an episode where you and Gideon Hay were the guests and we spoke
[Amit Varma]: about money in cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And to be honest, I was actually looking forward to today's conversation because sometimes,
[Amit Varma]: you know, all the researching and prepping and everything for these episodes gets like
[Amit Varma]: really intense.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have four hour sessions with people you may not know very well.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it all starts piling up.
[Amit Varma]: So this week, I thought that, you know, let me just have a relaxed conversation with an
[Amit Varma]: old friend, where we can just shoot the breeze.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't really need to do much prep, but sort of just sit back and chill.
[Amit Varma]: So what have you been doing during the lockdown?
[Amit Varma]: How have the last few months treated you?
[Guest]: Well, it's been kind of, it's been kind of odd, really, because dating back to January
[Guest]: of last year, the previous two months, December, I had taken off.
[Guest]: But in October, Arti Kumar Rao and I had spent time in Kerala, we were walking basically
[Guest]: along the coastline, started at Koblam beach in Kanyakumari and came down the Kerala coastline.
[Guest]: In November, I went back, I started at Trivandrum, Koblam, and went all the way up to Kollam.
[Guest]: Basically, we were researching what was happening to the coastlines.
[Guest]: And it was triggered by the fact that we were looking up some statistics.
[Guest]: And we realized that a survey in 2012 said that there was 45% coastal erosion.
[Guest]: A similar survey in 2016 said that number had gone up to 63%.
[Guest]: It's a massive, massive deterioration of coastline and that sparked a sort of curiosity, we weren't
[Guest]: quite sure how the project would pan out or what its contours would be.
[Guest]: What we wanted to do was what we typically do in these kind of stories, go there, see
[Guest]: what there is to be seen, and try and get a fix on how, on what is happening and therefore
[Guest]: what the story is shaping out to be.
[Guest]: So we went without any preconceptions, we were just talking to people, we were just
[Guest]: walking the coast, documenting what there was.
[Guest]: December, we decided to take a month off, it was supposed to start again in January,
[Guest]: which didn't happen for a multitude of reasons, but February was fixed.
[Guest]: And then we started hearing about COVID, the early intimations, if you remember, one of
[Guest]: Kerala's first cases was in late January.
[Guest]: At that time, officially, there was supposed to be no COVID and there was no threat.
[Guest]: And if you remember, the health ministry saying, oh, this is just nonsense and all of that.
[Guest]: But somehow I didn't have a comfort level with that whole thing.
[Guest]: And March is supposed to be all our birthdays and oh, you know that, my birthday, Raji's
[Guest]: birthday, our wedding anniversary, all of that.
[Guest]: So these things come fairly close together, Raji's, the wedding anniversary is 5th, Raji's
[Guest]: birthday is 15th.
[Guest]: So typically during that time, we take a fortnight off and go somewhere, we were planning that
[Guest]: and somehow neither of us felt comfortable going and staying in some place.
[Guest]: So we said, look, let's just spend a quiet year, this time, we'll just spend it at home
[Guest]: to our own thing and all of that.
[Guest]: So we didn't go.
[Guest]: And then everything blew up.
[Guest]: So suddenly it was, you know, there's this whole thing of being confined to the four
[Guest]: walls going out only when necessary, maybe once a week, you go shopping for vegetables
[Guest]: and stuff.
[Guest]: And that's it.
[Guest]: The rest of the time you stay put.
[Guest]: And since then, it's been, things started slowly, we got to a point, but I'd also got
[Guest]: a grant from NatGeo to do a story.
[Guest]: Again, it was a COVID related story.
[Guest]: But NatGeo is very particular that you don't put yourself at risk.
[Guest]: So you're not supposed to travel if conditions are not absolutely normal.
[Guest]: So that was kind of, I was trying to figure out when I could go, it became September,
[Guest]: then it became October, it just kept postponing.
[Guest]: And then we started having a series of deaths in the family, three people all aged 82, all
[Guest]: very closely related.
[Guest]: For two of them, I couldn't go for one of them, nobody could go.
[Guest]: It was during the quarantine period and nobody was allowed.
[Guest]: So the neighbors actually did the last rites and stuff.
[Guest]: Then there was another one.
[Guest]: And then in January, there was my uncle, the man who literally brought me up.
[Guest]: So it's been, I think after that, I haven't quite gotten back to a sense of normalcy.
[Guest]: I keep, I think I do things these days more as a distraction.
[Guest]: You know how it is in joint families, death is not the end of anything.
[Guest]: One, there is a ton of paperwork, there's only my aunt who's a widow, she needs help.
[Guest]: But also, the remaining members of the family are suddenly aware of mortality, I think.
[Guest]: So there is a constant reaching out and sharing stories and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So it was, it's, I think, been very hard to escape the aftermath, to actually find that
[Guest]: private space to, to grieve and come to terms with it.
[Guest]: And so yeah, I mean, I've been watching the cricket often on the English series, Clubhouse
[Guest]: started.
[Guest]: So some of these guys, there's a guy called Ankit Menon, who's a producer with Star.
[Guest]: He roped me into doing what he calls a watch along.
[Guest]: So the match is going on, and you're commenting every now and again on what's going on.
[Guest]: Things like none of it is really work that I want to do or work that I'm supposed to
[Guest]: be doing.
[Guest]: But it's, I think, for me, a way of easing back into a semblance of normalcy, let's say.
[Guest]: What's that say?
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, not the same kind of experience.
[Guest]: But what is it like for you?
[Guest]: You've been hyperactive, actually.
[Amit Varma]: It appears to be that way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as you know, I've worked from home for, you know, more than a decade since I
[Amit Varma]: left Cricinfo, basically.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, it was pretty normal.
[Amit Varma]: And I am the kind of person who likes to stay home and read typically, I was just extremely
[Amit Varma]: fortunate in terms of, you know, extremely fortunate and privileged, I didn't really
[Amit Varma]: face a brunt of any of the shit that went down, started my online course, which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, took off and went well.
[Amit Varma]: And it was interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I wonder if this has happened to you, a tangential question that comes up is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Krish Ashok, where he was talking about this pyramid of learning,
[Amit Varma]: like, how do you learn the best?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, at one level, if you're told something, you learn it, if you have to write
[Amit Varma]: it down, you learn it better, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And the deepest way of learning something is by teaching it.
[Amit Varma]: So I realized that, you know, I keep, I mean, the main thrust of my writing courses, of
[Amit Varma]: course, to kind of tell, help the participants be more mindful of the language they use,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously build a frame through which they can look at their writing, but be more
[Amit Varma]: mindful.
[Amit Varma]: And then the idea is that by the end of the course, they are their own writing coach,
[Amit Varma]: they don't really need active guidance as such.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that I became more mindful as I was kind of teaching, it was interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you've taught so many things, writing, journalism, the whole gamut, has that kind
[Amit Varma]: of happened to you?
[Guest]: See, I used to do journalism workshops for symbiosis when I was in Bombay, I'd go down
[Guest]: to Pune, I did that for a couple of years.
[Guest]: The idea being that you go down on a Thursday night, and Friday and Saturday, you're at
[Guest]: the disposal of the students.
[Guest]: And it's full day sessions.
[Guest]: And then you hang back on Sunday, because the kids just want to talk and stuff like
[Guest]: that. But at that time, I was also a practicing journalist. And I don't think I thought about
[Guest]: what I was getting out of teaching so much as this is just something and I was doing
[Guest]: it pro bono.
[Guest]: It is just something that I think there was a guy called Shashidhar Nanjumdaya, who was
[Guest]: the Dean at Symbiosis Journalism course, he's the one who wrote me into it, and it was fine.
[Guest]: We just drive over once, I think a month or so.
[Guest]: I think when the penny dropped for me was when I taught alongside Paul Salopek, during
[Guest]: the out of Eden walk, we did three workshops in Delhi, Chennai and Kolkata.
[Guest]: And in the Delhi workshop, we were coming straight off that out of Eden walk, we literally
[Guest]: drove down to Delhi and did the workshop and and a lot of them were actually practicing
[Guest]: journalists from the wire from from Indian Express, there was people from print, from
[Guest]: caravan itself, all of that.
[Guest]: And the initial structure was that Paul, there's a Don Belt, who's the who for 40 years was
[Guest]: a writer and senior editor at National Geographic, before he became a full time instructor.
[Guest]: For Don and Aarti for the visuals, we're supposed to be teaching I was kind of floating, there
[Guest]: wasn't much that was part of the set curriculum.
[Guest]: And on day one, the course was basically like we taught some, some theory.
[Guest]: But we fixed an area in Delhi, it was Old Delhi.
[Guest]: And the idea was that the cohort goes out there, they first have to identify story ideas,
[Guest]: they have to pitch it, we question the pitches.
[Guest]: Once it is accepted, you go there reported.
[Guest]: And at the end of a reporting day, you come back to base and we discuss what you've seen
[Guest]: and heard and how you've taken notes and stuff.
[Guest]: And we fine tune that you go back next day to fill in the blanks.
[Guest]: The day after that you come and start drafting your story.
[Guest]: And we oversee every part of the process we work into really with the students.
[Guest]: So the first day was basically theory broadly what you needed to know when you were doing
[Guest]: that kind of journalism narrative.
[Guest]: And I remember, there was Paul's session in the morning followed by Don followed by Arti.
[Guest]: And at some point, Paul said, brain, can you do a quick session on structure because I
[Guest]: left that out.
[Guest]: So I did an impromptu session of about 15 minutes.
[Guest]: And the thing was, there was very little notice.
[Guest]: That was about an hour before I was actually doing this was when Paul told me about it.
[Guest]: So I was suddenly thinking, okay, how, I mean, you know how it is, there is so many structures,
[Guest]: there is no defined template that you can just, you know, pull out of a bag and hand
[Guest]: it over to the students.
[Guest]: So I was trying to think of how do I get them, how do I give them a way in which they can
[Guest]: think structure for themselves, as opposed to my prescribing a structure.
[Guest]: And I ended up using the fishbone as an example.
[Guest]: And how to organize material around the fishbone, which is the simplest and the most malleable
[Guest]: form of structuring a story.
[Guest]: And I think that is when the penny dropped, I realized that by being forced in that finite
[Guest]: amount of time to think through a particular aspect of writing, and to then be able to
[Guest]: explain it to practicing journalists in such a way that they were able to absorb it, and
[Guest]: then immediately apply it the next day, I forced myself to think through a whole lot
[Guest]: of structures and disciplines that I had learned, and then refine it and boil it down into a
[Guest]: I think it was a 20-25 minute quick talk with sketches on a whiteboard.
[Guest]: That is when I realized the value of teaching, not so much for the students themselves, but
[Guest]: for me personally, because it made me go back to first principles, it made me think of things
[Guest]: that I don't know if it's the right word, but you know how we do things by instinct.
[Guest]: And then somebody says, how did you structure it?
[Guest]: And you're reverse engineering and saying, see, I thought this way, that way, you don't
[Guest]: actually you just sit in front of the computer and the experience of all those years of doing
[Guest]: it comes, forcing me to think from then I actually started thinking through process.
[Guest]: So there were two other workshops, and then Aarti and I did our own workshops.
[Guest]: And for all of that, more than what I conveyed or what we conveyed to the students, I think
[Guest]: it was boiling down everything that you knew or thought you knew, understanding what you
[Guest]: didn't know, trying to find the answers for that, and then structuring it all in such
[Guest]: a way that it was useful.
[Guest]: I think that yeah, you're right, I appreciated the writing and editing process more after
[Guest]: I taught the workshops.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's really interesting, because, you know, one of the things as you were speaking
[Amit Varma]: that struck me is that how we learned whatever it is that we do, whether it is a writing
[Amit Varma]: or the journalism or whatever else is often through a kind of osmosis where we are not
[Amit Varma]: thinking consciously that these are the first principles and it flows from this to this
[Amit Varma]: and from this to this, and this is why we do it.
[Amit Varma]: We learn things by osmosis.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes we learn the right thing, sometimes we learn the wrong things, which is why so
[Amit Varma]: much of my old writing makes me cringe.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of how we go.
[Amit Varma]: But much more useful way of doing it is, of course, by approaching it from first principles
[Amit Varma]: and kind of building a frame through which you can, and of course, adapting that frame
[Amit Varma]: as you go along, but having some kind of frame rather than things happen arbitrarily.
[Amit Varma]: Now, there's a question that arises from this, which is sort of tangential, but not
[Amit Varma]: quite, which is that people often make a distinction between art and craft.
[Amit Varma]: As in, you know, the craft is sort of how you're putting the table together, or how
[Amit Varma]: you're making the sculpture out of a block of stone.
[Amit Varma]: And art is that beautiful thing which you cannot put in words, which you cannot break
[Amit Varma]: it down.
[Amit Varma]: And I have recently been thinking that actually, they're not different.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there is a difference.
[Amit Varma]: And the difference is that art is basically craft, which you cannot articulate, which
[Amit Varma]: you cannot break down into principles, but they're there.
[Amit Varma]: It's implicitly kind of happened, like when a musician sits down and creates a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: tune.
[Amit Varma]: It seems like art, like when he's producing it, and when he's adding other instruments
[Amit Varma]: as craft, but when he composes it, it seems like art.
[Amit Varma]: But at a level beyond articulation, it's actually craft.
[Amit Varma]: Because he's put those notes together, because they have a certain effect on the brain of
[Amit Varma]: the listener, and they will, certain neurons will fire in certain ways, the listener will
[Amit Varma]: feel a particular way.
[Amit Varma]: And it's intuitive.
[Amit Varma]: So the more we understand art, everything kind of breaks down to the level of craft,
[Amit Varma]: which again, and I'm thinking aloud, and it's the first time I've taken this thought a little
[Amit Varma]: further than this, which is that if this is correct, and I believe it obviously is, if
[Amit Varma]: this is correct, that everything can be broken down like that, then you know, when we speak
[Amit Varma]: of that hypothetical situation of artificial intelligence creating art, can AI write novel,
[Amit Varma]: which is as good as something by Updike?
[Amit Varma]: Can a monkey with a typewriter write Shakespeare, for example?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, an AI is not a monkey with a typewriter, you know, that's brute force.
[Amit Varma]: Machine learning is just a whole different ballgame.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: I don't know if it's, if it's possible to say that art is merely craft that we're not
[Guest]: able to articulate.
[Guest]: For me, it's kind of like this.
[Guest]: Funnily enough, on Clubhouse, the other day, there was this South African cricket coach,
[Guest]: Jodi, who had joined in, and we were, among other things, discussing what sets certain
[Guest]: players apart from other players, we were actually watching Virat Kohli at that time.
[Guest]: And this was, I think, in the previous one day, and not the one that just got over.
[Guest]: And we were looking at how Virat was playing well within himself, and his possession wasn't
[Guest]: all that good.
[Guest]: He needed to be there.
[Guest]: He needed to do both.
[Guest]: He needed to keep the score going, and at the same time, he needed to be there till
[Guest]: the end.
[Guest]: And we were watching him cycle through the gears.
[Guest]: And Jodi was making this point that some players, I mean, we say that some players have multiple
[Guest]: gears and stuff like that.
[Guest]: He said, yeah, they do.
[Guest]: I mean, some players have just two gears or three gears or whatever, some have five, six.
[Guest]: But he said it all is built around that first gear, which is the absolute craft of batsmanship.
[Guest]: The defense, the semi defense, which is basically a kind of offensive defense, where instead
[Guest]: of stopping a ball dead, you're playing it a little bit more with intent and, you know,
[Guest]: taking the single or whatever, followed by the offensive strokes, which are merely extensions
[Guest]: of defensive strokes when you think about it, right.
[Guest]: So he was talking about how if your basics are strong, then somewhere along the way,
[Guest]: your personality comes into it as well.
[Guest]: So if we teach syntax to a room full of people and make them all right in a particular fashion,
[Guest]: fine, but if we teach that same syntax, and the basic principles of writing how to craft
[Guest]: a lead, how to do transitions, all of that, how to how to work on an ending, and leave
[Guest]: it to people to then take it from there, then individual personalities kick in, which is
[Guest]: where voice comes in, which is where art comes in.
[Guest]: Some people will produce well crafted prose, and some will produce magic.
[Guest]: And that difference, I think, goes to personality, that difference goes to goes to that individual
[Guest]: and his peculiar sense of aesthetic.
[Guest]: One reason why we are not able to precisely articulate what the art of writing like the
[Guest]: art of anything else is, is probably because of that, that the art part comes from everything
[Guest]: that we have known and learned and experienced and gone through, which is which has made
[Guest]: us who we are.
[Guest]: And that translates into how we do I had this magic moment once when I was in midday, Trilok
[Guest]: Gurtu was about to release his first album, he was making a name for himself, he was big.
[Guest]: And he was working on an album called glimpses with Shobha with his mom.
[Guest]: And I called up Trilok asked for an interview, and he called me to the recording studio.
[Guest]: We were sitting and talking and Trilok was explaining certain things.
[Guest]: And I was just tapping the table as I went along.
[Guest]: So Trilok said, do you do players that I used to play the drums at one time.
[Guest]: So we started vibing at that level, he started talking about, you know, drum patterns and
[Guest]: rhythm patterns and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And he's a drummer.
[Guest]: So after a bit, he said, Okay, I'm going back into the recording room, would you like to
[Guest]: come?
[Guest]: So I went in there.
[Guest]: And what these guys were doing was they turned the recording on, but they had no script,
[Guest]: no plan.
[Guest]: What Trilok was doing, he would sit at the drums, and he would just start, he would pick
[Guest]: up from a very basic pattern, and you would start complicating it.
[Guest]: And Shobha would be sitting there quietly listening.
[Guest]: And suddenly she would start singing, mostly humming or just just using basic Saridama
[Guest]: notes, but she would be matching that rhythm pattern.
[Guest]: So as Shobha caught up to that, Trilok would change and Shobha would change with it.
[Guest]: And they were creating music on the fly.
[Guest]: And it was magical to watch because there was no script, there was no pre planning,
[Guest]: neither of them knew where the other was going.
[Guest]: And it was jazz fusion, almost live in front of you.
[Guest]: And at the end of it, I asked Trilok, is this going to make it to the final cut?
[Guest]: And he said, I don't know, what we're doing is just riffing and seeing what comes.
[Guest]: And maybe there will be snatches here, which will be the foundation of a piece that we
[Guest]: then do.
[Guest]: And throughout that album, I was thrilled to see that there was one particular bit,
[Guest]: it's not even a full song, just a little bit, which I instantly recognize saying I was there
[Guest]: when this was being created.
[Guest]: And that was magic.
[Guest]: And that that came from not Trilok's mastery of the instrument or Shobha's mastery of voice,
[Guest]: but from their mastery of themselves, I think, and how they could they could translate that
[Guest]: into their practice.
[Guest]: I was just saying that's probably a very convoluted answer, which didn't make much sense, but
[Amit Varma]: it's the best I have.
[Amit Varma]: It made a lot of sense when he stands there to unpack like, first of all, you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: Kohli and Kohli to me seems like if you could do a time lapse of his career over maybe the
[Amit Varma]: last 12 years, I think you that time lapse would show you Kraft turning into art.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember when, you know, we first saw him as a teenager, I don't know how you felt
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: But honestly, to me, he didn't seem impressive at all at that time.
[Amit Varma]: You know, he would play well square of the wicket, but some of his stroke play was limited.
[Amit Varma]: And he just didn't seem to really have it.
[Amit Varma]: And, and that just changed and that changed because, obviously, because of his incredible
[Amit Varma]: work ethic, where he put in those thousands of hours in the nets.
[Amit Varma]: And initially, it is Kraft, it is mindfulness, you kind of work on different aspects of it,
[Amit Varma]: you do it again and again till they become second nature to you.
[Amit Varma]: And then like you said, all the rest of you comes into it and you can kind of sort of
[Amit Varma]: express yourself in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: There is an aside here and the aside, I think, possibly applies more to sport than to say
[Amit Varma]: writing or art, which is that I came across his old interview with Bobby Fischer recently.
[Amit Varma]: And this was taken when he was in his 60s.
[Amit Varma]: And Fischer basically said he had no interest in chess anymore, it did not excite him because
[Amit Varma]: opening theory was so far that studying opening theory was a big part of making it to a certain
[Amit Varma]: level.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that, look, these days, the theory is so advanced that, you know, till the 18th
[Amit Varma]: move, you're basically playing what you have studied.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, very often when I watch a top grandmaster game today, you know, somebody
[Amit Varma]: will lose and he'll say, oh, I forgot the move order.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and a lot of the creativity goes into trying to figure out what your opponent
[Amit Varma]: hasn't prepared for, where you can find some random sidelines and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that doesn't excite him.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, that was one of the things that at an intellectual level, turned me off
[Amit Varma]: from poker, which is that point where you realize that initially, when you look at it
[Amit Varma]: as an outsider, it's very personality thing, you know, people are bluffing, people are
[Amit Varma]: looking for tells all of that shit is happening.
[Amit Varma]: But the more you play it, the more you realize that it is all math, to the point that there
[Amit Varma]: is something called perfect play.
[Amit Varma]: And that doesn't allow for personality per se, the deeper you study, the better you will
[Amit Varma]: be and you'll play in certain ways, but you can't look at the way a particular person
[Amit Varma]: is playing and say that, haan, ye toh ye hi hai.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess, and even with cricket, like I've often kind of mused aloud on whether if there
[Amit Varma]: was an alpha zero of cricket, what it would find, like, you know, for the benefit of my
[Amit Varma]: listeners, what alpha zero did to chess basically was that it played itself 1000s of times.
[Amit Varma]: And then it came up with new heuristics for playing chess.
[Amit Varma]: And it played what was until then the best chess software in the world, which was Stockfish.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, if our top player Magnus Carlsen is 2800 plus in terms of rating, Stockfish
[Amit Varma]: would be about 3500.
[Amit Varma]: And it had been developed over 20 years, it used brute force, it did a crazy number of
[Amit Varma]: calculations, millions of calculations per second.
[Amit Varma]: And alpha zero did a fraction of those calculations per second, and destroyed Stockfish.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the reasons was that it found that many of the heuristics that humans had internalized
[Amit Varma]: were just wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, it found kind of more intuitive ways of doing things.
[Amit Varma]: And I've always thought that, you know, if there was something like that for cricket,
[Amit Varma]: where you take the laws of physics, you take the laws of physiology, you put all of that
[Amit Varma]: together, you might actually discover that some of the dogmas in cricket are possibly
[Amit Varma]: wrong.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people used to criticize Bradman and say, where is this backlift coming from?
[Amit Varma]: People criticize Steve Smith for his technique or Rishabh Pant, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, it's not that these guys are doing anything wrong, maybe they're doing
[Amit Varma]: something right by accident.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we don't know what the optimal is.
[Amit Varma]: But when you find the optimal, everybody will move towards that, because hey, that's optimal.
[Amit Varma]: But I get that, you know, both in sport and art, there's a role for personality.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the craft is sort of a minimum requirement in terms of, you know, like the
[Amit Varma]: coach you were referring to, Setya Antilabh, you know, that basic stuff, the defensive
[Amit Varma]: stuff you have to first get right, and then the rest of it flows.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, after this digression, and another digression, by the way, you're talking about
[Amit Varma]: gears.
[Amit Varma]: And I remembered, if you remember, back in the 80s, they used to say Ravi Shastri has
[Amit Varma]: only two gears, first gear and fourth gear, because he would do tuk tuk tuk, and then
[Amit Varma]: he would go, bam, bam, bam, which was a lot of fun, though in commentary, one could say
[Amit Varma]: that Shastri had only first gear, which was all the cliches he would fall back upon.
[Amit Varma]: And Navjot Siddhu had only the fourth gear.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but so I have a question, which actually, you know, struck me from when you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: traveling around and doing all of these stories.
[Amit Varma]: I think one of the things that all of us struggle with is to not get jaded, to be able to see
[Amit Varma]: the world in new ways and to be able to see with new eyes, typically, what happens is,
[Amit Varma]: we see the world around us, and then we are used to it, and then we don't see it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's there, we take it for granted, it is what it is, we don't actually see it.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, like in my episode with Annie Zaidi, we spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how as a writer, you constantly have to force yourself to see with new eyes.
[Amit Varma]: In your case, you've also traveled, you know, and when you're traveling, especially with
[Amit Varma]: the intent of writing, you are seeing things with new eyes, you're always kind of redefining
[Amit Varma]: your vision of the world.
[Amit Varma]: What is that process like?
[Amit Varma]: Is it a process you've thought consciously about?
[Amit Varma]: You know, and is it an enriching process?
[Amit Varma]: Are you a different person from in fundamental ways from what you would be if you hadn't
[Amit Varma]: done all this sort of traveling and writing and seeing in new ways?
[Guest]: Actually, I think I had one of those, those early days when I had no idea what I wanted
[Guest]: to be.
[Guest]: It's not, it's I suppose, journalists at some point start saying, you know, I always wanted
[Guest]: to be a writer.
[Guest]: In my case, no, I knew that I liked reading, I knew that I liked the magic that words can
[Guest]: create.
[Guest]: And that's it.
[Guest]: And that was just like a liking for music, or just sitting at a drum kit and playing
[Guest]: and seeing what comes.
[Guest]: But not with any conscious mind that I wanted to do this for a living or whatever.
[Guest]: It's over time.
[Guest]: And there was that period after I dropped out of college.
[Guest]: And until I got my first job as a journalist, when pretty much, see, it was a fairly fraught
[Guest]: time at home, because one, I was the family's eldest grandchild to it was a family that
[Guest]: was hugely academically accomplished, pretty much everybody was, you know, highly educated
[Guest]: and doing all sorts of big things.
[Guest]: And there I was, I was supposed to be the hope of the family and all of that.
[Guest]: And I did my experiments with drugs and dropped out and at home and became very, for want
[Guest]: of a better word, very difficult to just exist, because there was this constant din in my
[Guest]: ears about what a wastrel I was, and you know, how I had destroyed the hopes of not just
[Guest]: my mom and dad, but of the entire extended family, all of that was coming into the thing.
[Guest]: So my escape at that time was, initially, I had a bike, I mean, I had a bike in college.
[Guest]: So I take the bike and just head off into some part of Tamil Nadu, absolutely no agenda,
[Guest]: no nothing.
[Guest]: And I just just go where the bylanes took me, I mean, you go along the road and then
[Guest]: find out, and then at some point, I mean, I wasn't earning any money.
[Guest]: And the deal at home was, if you don't earn, we're not going to support you.
[Guest]: I mean, there is a house for you to sleep in if you want to.
[Guest]: And there'll always be food on the table anytime you want.
[Guest]: But that's about it.
[Guest]: We're not giving you any money for anything at all.
[Guest]: So I sold the bike, and then I started taking these bus rides.
[Guest]: So I just go to the, you know, Mofusulu bus stand and hop on the first bus that I find
[Guest]: and go somewhere and it is along.
[Guest]: It is during that period that I realized that the thing I loved best was to go to a place
[Guest]: that I knew nothing about and just to sit there and let things happen.
[Guest]: People would come up and ask you where you're from and what you're doing there.
[Guest]: And they will tell you about themselves and they will take you around and show you things
[Guest]: and that became, for me, I think the trigger that got me into journalism.
[Guest]: Once I got in there, I realized that journalism wasn't what I had imagined it to be in the
[Guest]: sense of, you know, I've done some freelance writing here and there during the same period.
[Guest]: But actual professional journalism that started in 89 when I came to Bombay.
[Guest]: And my initial idea of journalism or the dream that I had of going to all these places and
[Guest]: seeing all of these things, they didn't quite materialize that way.
[Guest]: Because journalism was incredibly transactional.
[Guest]: You were sent somewhere to do a story to come back and you know how it is, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if this is a story, then you go to that place, you know quickly what you need
[Guest]: to make a note of to get that scene right.
[Guest]: And then you need these two or three eloquent quotes from whoever the affected party is.
[Guest]: And it's hunting and gathering very quickly what you need and then coming back to base,
[Guest]: writing the story, rinse, repeat.
[Guest]: So for a long time, I got sucked into that, the brief periods when I could actually like,
[Guest]: for instance, when elections were on, Nikhil would send me off to some part of the country
[Guest]: or the other.
[Guest]: And he was good enough to not tell me what he wanted from me.
[Guest]: So it was basically just go there and explore.
[Guest]: And those times I used to love to write, the rest of the time, it was just functional writing.
[Guest]: Cricket happened, which made it even worse, because I mean, I was captive to the TV camera
[Guest]: and my laptop and keyboard.
[Guest]: And I think once I got out of that is when I told myself that I don't want to go back
[Guest]: to that.
[Guest]: I don't want to become, I still edit sometimes for some people who send me stuff.
[Guest]: I do my own writing for myself, but I realized that nothing quite comes close to how alive
[Guest]: you feel when you're in a place that you know nothing about.
[Guest]: And it slowly unravels, and it opens up to you.
[Guest]: And it is probably during that time, it also happened that that is when Paul Salopek started
[Guest]: his Out of Eden walk, and we started getting in touch with each other.
[Guest]: So I was following the walk, and then the whole thing of walking with him, which is
[Guest]: typically going to unknown places, I mean, we had absolutely no idea where we would end
[Guest]: up at night, who we would end up in the middle of what their concerns would be.
[Guest]: And it was just sit back, absorb, you know, you're not forcing a story, you're not even
[Guest]: fussed whether there is a story or not, you're just there to see and hear what there is to
[Guest]: be seen and heard.
[Guest]: And I think that made it incredibly difficult for me to go back, has made it incredibly
[Guest]: difficult to go back to what is called day to day journalism, the quotidian kind of stuff
[Guest]: that we do, which is fit in the blanks of whatever it is.
[Guest]: But yeah, it's brilliant, because it also makes you break, we talked about craft and
[Guest]: templates and stuff, it makes you break away from that, because every day is a new experience.
[Guest]: And nothing prepares you for that, right?
[Guest]: So you have at one level to think in terms of what you're hearing.
[Guest]: And you know, that whole thing we keep telling students, right?
[Guest]: If it's not clear to you, it's not going to be clear to the reader.
[Guest]: So you're looking for clarity.
[Guest]: So a farmer in Rajasthan is explaining what his problem is with MSP, and you don't have
[Guest]: a clue what his life is like.
[Guest]: So you get him to go into detail.
[Guest]: And you try to understand that.
[Guest]: And then you ask questions when things are not clear until it's all fixed in your head.
[Guest]: But then you have to go away from all the templates that you've been taught to use or
[Guest]: have used or like you said, internalized through osmosis, and come up with a way to tell this
[Guest]: in such a way that it makes sense.
[Guest]: So it is a constant sort of, and that's, that's the fun, I think, of being in the field.
[Guest]: It's a constant reinvention of yourself of what you think, you know, and at the same
[Guest]: time, it's a constant infusion of new things and new thoughts and new, new lives that you
[Guest]: knew nothing about.
[Guest]: And yeah, it's magic.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it, you know, what do you say about, you know, being able to like when you were on
[Amit Varma]: the road with Paul Salopek, and you're just traveling around and there's no agenda, you
[Amit Varma]: don't have to sit down and write a piece the next day.
[Amit Varma]: And that allows you to just kind of relax and imbibe and all of that seems to me to
[Amit Varma]: be, you know, so important a part of that process of seeing because sometimes also what
[Amit Varma]: happens is when you're a writer or a travel writer, you go somewhere, you say, I'll write
[Amit Varma]: a travel piece, or I'll write a book, or I'll do this, the desire to see changes the way
[Amit Varma]: you see and what you see.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that that can often be something that distorts the way that you see the world.
[Amit Varma]: And that's just one of the many anxieties that shape us.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even otherwise, I think outside the context of writing, in say, a social context,
[Amit Varma]: the anxiety to appear a certain way to others or to get the validation of others, or to
[Amit Varma]: be seen as someone, you know, compassionate or intelligent or whatever the case might
[Amit Varma]: be, then shapes your behavior and then shapes you and all of these outside forces, which
[Amit Varma]: should not really matter, then kind of end up changing the person you are and shaping
[Amit Varma]: the person you are.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know if there's an escape for that.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, you can delude yourself into thinking that you're free from that desire
[Amit Varma]: for validation or the anxieties, you can say that, hey, I am going to be one of those people
[Amit Varma]: who is not always trying to signal virtue.
[Amit Varma]: But even by telling yourself that you are, in a sense, signaling virtue to yourself,
[Amit Varma]: so it can get into these complicated loops.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, wherever you say something that might be unfamiliar to my readers who
[Amit Varma]: don't know you as well as I do, I'll quickly try and fill in those gaps you referred to
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil.
[Amit Varma]: Nikhil was your editor at Rediff, which, you know, both of you were kind of part of the
[Amit Varma]: startup team right there from the beginning, almost.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Paul Salopek and kind of working with him.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, can you talk a little bit more about that, that what was it that drew you
[Amit Varma]: to that project that just walking to strange, unfamiliar places.
[Amit Varma]: And also the other thing here that strikes me is that Paul, of course, was walking through
[Amit Varma]: India, Pakistan, all over the world, he's walking, but he's walking as someone who is
[Amit Varma]: a stranger, his eyes are seeing these things for the first time.
[Amit Varma]: In your case, that is not the case.
[Amit Varma]: You have, even if not seen that exact geography for the first time, you're an insider in a
[Amit Varma]: certain way.
[Amit Varma]: But this part of you that is translating for Paul, I mean, not in terms of language, but
[Amit Varma]: just in terms of perspective, and this part of you, which is also seeing things maybe
[Amit Varma]: through his eyes for the first time.
[Amit Varma]: What was that whole experience like?
[Amit Varma]: What was the project even just talk a bit more about that?
[Guest]: Yeah, sure.
[Guest]: Digression before that, Nikhil was actually the only editor that I've ever worked with.
[Guest]: So he, I worked briefly with Vijayan Karnapalli, who's the father of Ammu Karnapalli of AFP.
[Guest]: That was a free press, but that was for about six months.
[Guest]: And then Nikhil called me over to the Indian Post when he was taking over as editor.
[Guest]: So Indian Post followed by the Midday Group, followed by Sunday Observer, followed by Rediff.
[Guest]: So as far as working with editors is concerned, he's the only one I worked with.
[Guest]: I think it was about five or six months after he started his project that I came across
[Guest]: it, one of those random links.
[Guest]: And I went and looked at the Out of Eden Walk website, and I was struck by the enormity
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: A man saying that I'm going to walk 23,000 miles, and that he's starting somewhere in
[Guest]: the middle of Africa and going to end up at Tierra del Fuego at the extreme tip of Latin
[Guest]: America to trace the migratory path of ancient man.
[Guest]: That was the idea of the project.
[Guest]: And something about the scale and the scope of it was enormously appealing.
[Guest]: The ambition, because I was looking at, you mentioned travel writing, I was looking at
[Guest]: going places.
[Guest]: And travel writing is opposite, because if we go there, if we are expected to write a
[Guest]: travel piece, we are trapped in this thing of, how can I go to, say, Agra and not write
[Guest]: about the Taj Mahal?
[Guest]: So you end up with these things must do kind of things, and your space is finite, and you
[Guest]: hit all the high spots, and your piece is just like every other piece.
[Guest]: I'd love to see a travel piece where somebody just spends time with the locals of Agra,
[Guest]: keeps the Taj in the background completely, and just talks to them about what it is like
[Guest]: to be this place where there is all of humanity just flowing past.
[Guest]: But you don't get to do those kind of pieces, and those are the kind of things that used
[Guest]: to attract me.
[Guest]: And suddenly, there is this man who, like you said, is walking into the unknown and
[Guest]: the unfamiliar, every step he takes.
[Guest]: I learned later, once we started engaging, that he does a tremendous amount of research.
[Guest]: He reads everything there is to know about a country before he actually sets foot inside
[Guest]: the country.
[Guest]: And that whole project had this enormity to it that was magnetic.
[Guest]: And at that time, we were doing Peepli, that was Aarti, Rahul Bhatia, me, and Kalyan Varma.
[Guest]: And some of our stories caught his eye, and he started reaching out to us, and we started
[Guest]: sort of doing back and forth, initially through DMs, and then emails and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So when he was, in fact, when he was in Afghanistan, is when he started mooting the idea of us
[Guest]: joining him on that walk.
[Guest]: Then he walked through Pakistan.
[Guest]: And by then, it kind of got firmed up that, yeah, we will be walking with him.
[Guest]: And like you said, it was, for instance, we started in Amritsar, I mean, we met him at
[Guest]: the Wagah border and walked to Amritsar.
[Guest]: And then we spent about five, six days in Amritsar itself.
[Guest]: I've been to Amritsar before, about three or four times.
[Guest]: And you have a concept of that place, there is the Golden Temple, and there is the life
[Guest]: all around it, and then there is the larger Amritsar, which is businesses and all of that.
[Guest]: And this time when we were in Amritsar, there was Paul, there was Aarti, and there was me.
[Guest]: And one of us would always be with Paul for translation and, you know, things like that.
[Guest]: And to see what Paul was saying to things that you take for granted, he suddenly stops
[Guest]: and looks and says, what is this?
[Guest]: And how did this happen?
[Guest]: And what is the origin of this and, you know, things like that.
[Guest]: These are questions that don't even occur to us, because it is so familiar that we think
[Guest]: we know it.
[Guest]: And we don't really question that assumption of knowledge.
[Guest]: So seeing it through his eyes suddenly made me realize that there was so much about things
[Guest]: that I had taken for granted that I didn't know about.
[Guest]: And I mean, there was the physicality of it, the walk itself, and in the blazing heat of
[Guest]: summers when we decided to, when we ended up walking in Rajasthan.
[Guest]: So that was not something that you do by choice, but whatever it was, I think that was the
[Guest]: standout feature for me, that you're constantly seeing things that you know how it is.
[Guest]: For instance, when we go to a strange place, we are constantly looking at signboards, and
[Guest]: we're looking at the backs of rickshaws to see what the stickers are, and everything
[Guest]: is new and unfamiliar, and we're trying to absorb it all.
[Guest]: But for the life of me, I don't remember what the signboard is, a street away from my place,
[Guest]: what signboards are, right?
[Guest]: It's a blur, you don't see it.
[Guest]: And our country is that familiar known place, you've gone there to report on politics, or
[Guest]: you've gone there for some other reason.
[Guest]: And you think you know it all.
[Guest]: And you suddenly realize that there is so much more to it.
[Guest]: And there is so much extra, there is so much that is new in the seemingly familiar.
[Guest]: And that, I think, was the magical part of that particular experience.
[Guest]: You talked about seeing it, Paul seeing it for the first time, and us seeing it through
[Guest]: his eyes.
[Guest]: I think that bit about us seeing it through his eyes was the takeaway.
[Guest]: Because things that we would have passed by, generally, were things that he would stop
[Guest]: and stare and want to know more about.
[Guest]: And initially, you have this look, every day, you have to cover a certain distance.
[Guest]: And that distance is kind of not predetermined, because once you leave a town, the only thing
[Guest]: you can do is you walk until you get to some form of human habitation, where you can ask
[Guest]: people if they can shelter you for a night and stuff.
[Guest]: That could be 30 kilometers away, it could be 40 kilometers away or more.
[Guest]: So there is that urge to get to that place.
[Guest]: And walking 40 kilometers in a day is pretty much eight to 10 hours.
[Guest]: In the middle, when Paul stops at something that seems very obvious and starts examining
[Guest]: it deeper, initially, there is that fretfulness in you, it's like, look, I mean, what's the
[Guest]: big deal?
[Guest]: Can we move on?
[Guest]: But then you see what he's looking at.
[Guest]: And you see later, when he writes these pieces, what he makes of these little things that
[Guest]: you see.
[Guest]: And suddenly, it occurs to you that nothing is too trivial for your attention, nothing
[Guest]: is too trivial for a human being, let alone a storyteller.
[Guest]: And if your default setting is to tell stories, it really is magic when you take that time
[Guest]: to slow down, to even question assumptions, to see things again, that you've already seen,
[Guest]: and see it with new eyes.
[Guest]: So I think this whole thing changed me as a person.
[Guest]: I remember there was a time, this was before the lockdown, there was one moment of epiphany
[Guest]: when, or it is, I don't know, I felt that somehow I've forgotten how to write.
[Guest]: And this was because somebody gave me an assignment, and then I turned it down.
[Guest]: So I didn't think that I could do justice to it.
[Guest]: And I was telling Raji, you know her, my wife, so I was telling Raji about it, and Raji thought
[Guest]: for a bit and said, listen, I want you to do one thing, within a week, find something
[Guest]: in our neighborhood that you would like to write about, and write it just for me.
[Guest]: It's your gift to me.
[Guest]: And what I did was I just walked around the couple of streets, fringing my house, and
[Guest]: I found a little human story.
[Guest]: And I wrote that and I gave it to her and she came back.
[Guest]: I mean, she gave me back the printout with, you haven't forgotten how to write and a little
[Guest]: heart symbol and sent it and it all kind of, I think, came together at that point.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a beautiful story.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give me some examples of what you were referring to about, about seeing through
[Amit Varma]: Paul's eyes?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, something that he saw, where you wondered, like, what is this?
[Amit Varma]: Why are we even stopping here?
[Amit Varma]: And then something else happens out of that.
[Guest]: Yeah, for instance, if you go to, say, the Golden Temple, one of the things that you
[Guest]: take for granted is the langar, that whole thing of service.
[Guest]: So early morning, when you go there, you find people actually cleaning.
[Guest]: The place where the footwear is kept, it generally, by definition, becomes muddy, right?
[Guest]: People walking up and down.
[Guest]: So there's this constant stream of people who are pouring water and then using a big
[Guest]: scraper to get rid of that mud, and pretty soon it becomes muddy again, and they start
[Guest]: doing it again.
[Guest]: Then you go into the Golden Temple and you will find, for instance, there are these steps,
[Guest]: the tank only up to a point, can you, you know, climb down and wash yourself, a couple
[Guest]: of steps.
[Guest]: And those steps, because they are submerged in water 24-7, 365, they can get kind of mossy
[Guest]: and slippery and all that, right?
[Guest]: So there are these three or four people who have these rubber, long-handled rubber scrapers,
[Guest]: and they just keep scraping the steps all along.
[Guest]: And as soon as they're done with one round, they start all over again, and then somebody
[Guest]: else comes and takes over.
[Guest]: I've been to the Golden Temple, and I've seen this, and I think, yeah, okay, langar and
[Guest]: service.
[Guest]: But for Paul, it is like, who are you?
[Guest]: What brings you here?
[Guest]: And we realized that these kids who are doing it early in the morning, they're college students,
[Guest]: who before college, they come there at four o'clock in the morning, and they start doing
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: They do it till about 6.37, and then they go to college.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, office goers come in at about seven or so, and they start, you know, helping until
[Guest]: it is time for them to go to office.
[Guest]: And then some senior citizens are coming in who have the day at their disposal.
[Guest]: So for us, the thing is, volunteers are cleaning this.
[Guest]: But it's not that.
[Guest]: It is actually, these are people who have other things to do, and who think that it
[Guest]: is necessary for them to find that time and put in that effort, irrespective of lost sleep
[Guest]: or, you know, of 10 other things that are waiting their attention.
[Guest]: And Paul would meticulously, and we went to the Golden Temple multiple times.
[Guest]: So every time we went there, there would be a fresh group of people, and you would want
[Guest]: to know who they were, and what their background is, and what is it that they get out of it?
[Guest]: What is that feeling?
[Guest]: And it was amazing when these kids started talking about, these are regular college kids.
[Guest]: And there was one moment when we were actually standing there and watching, and a couple
[Guest]: of the kids who had done their deed for the day, they went and they changed into the clothes
[Guest]: that they were going to go to college in, and it was your classic ripped jeans and,
[Guest]: you know, funky t-shirt, and they had a bandana knotted up and all of that.
[Guest]: And these kids were there from apparently 3.45 till about 6.30 or so, just cleaning
[Guest]: the mud that people had trekked into that place of the footwear.
[Guest]: That was, in all my previous trips, never occurred to me to find out who these people
[Guest]: are, why are they doing this?
[Guest]: What do they get out of it?
[Guest]: What is it that drives them?
[Guest]: But they don't do it just once in a while, right, they commit to months of this.
[Guest]: Okay, this month, we are coming here at this time and doing it and then somebody else is
[Guest]: taking over or whatever.
[Guest]: That was one.
[Guest]: I mean, you could go on pretty much everything.
[Guest]: It was like things that I had taken for granted by what contours I, because for him, everything
[Guest]: was new and strange.
[Guest]: So he did not know to ignore certain things, put it that way, to say, okay, this is not
[Guest]: part of my story, or this is not part of my narrative.
[Guest]: My Golden Temple narrative wouldn't have been about this, it would have been about, you
[Guest]: know, the Guru Granth Sahib being read and the various rituals that take part around
[Guest]: it and all that.
[Guest]: This was about people.
[Guest]: And yeah, that was one of them.
[Guest]: There were so many moments of pure magic because of this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And again, so kind of inspiring, you know, I remember when I was sort of traveling through
[Amit Varma]: Pakistan in 2006, following the cricket tour.
[Amit Varma]: And I was also kind of blogging from there frequently, not exactly live blogging.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from the cricket, I'd, you know, just go out with my camera, shoot everything,
[Amit Varma]: spent a ton of time just almost photo blogging as it were.
[Amit Varma]: These are of course, the days before Instagram and all of that take off.
[Amit Varma]: So it was all coming on my blog.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, I kind of asked myself that, how do I maintain this balance, that on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand, it's nice that I'm noticing things and that they're not normalized and I'm not
[Amit Varma]: just looking at them with the jaded eye.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, there is also the desire to find something remarkable everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: You know, every stone on the road has a story behind it.
[Amit Varma]: And how do you kind of balance that?
[Amit Varma]: But I think, you know, thinking of it now, I'd rather that one goes too far in trying
[Amit Varma]: to see than not see at all.
[Amit Varma]: Like I have, you know, it just strikes me right now that, you know, 15 years after that
[Amit Varma]: in all this time that I've been living in Bombay, I have never gone out in Bombay with
[Amit Varma]: my DSLR and done kind of photo blogging and sort of look for stories like this.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing that struck me as you were saying that things that we take for granted or we
[Amit Varma]: don't even notice and we don't ask what is the story behind it.
[Amit Varma]: I remember a long time back, someone had tweeted, I can't remember who for the life of me, but
[Amit Varma]: I vaguely have the impression it was someone who worked at the Hindu.
[Amit Varma]: But someone had tweeted about this interesting artifact on the roads of Tamil Nadu, where
[Amit Varma]: there are sort of these ledges, which are at shoulder height, or so on.
[Amit Varma]: And nobody knows what the purpose is.
[Amit Varma]: And she asked around and nobody had any idea what they're doing.
[Amit Varma]: There's no apparent function.
[Amit Varma]: They're there on the highways, they're there on the roads and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then she later discovered that, you know, labourers who carry things on their head,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that's where they rest, where they just transferred that load to that ledge,
[Amit Varma]: which is why the height, which is why everything.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me as so interesting that something that is not in use anymore, something that
[Amit Varma]: no one remembers, and yet it carries sort of a piece of the past.
[Amit Varma]: It's all this sort of social and historical significance embedded within it, which I...
[Guest]: Yeah, they call it Sumetangi.
[Guest]: Sumetangi translates into load bearer.
[Guest]: And you find that right across the countryside everywhere.
[Guest]: I was thinking, I mean, you mentioned going out and doing a mix of cricket plus, you know,
[Guest]: what I see and what I get and all that.
[Guest]: You also did the same thing immediately after the tsunami, right?
[Guest]: And that should have informed that particular experience of not going with a particular
[Guest]: story in mind, so much as just going there and seeing what there was and then figuring
[Guest]: out how to tell that story, how to capture that story in words or images or whatever
[Guest]: it is, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I even wrote a piece for you when you were at Rediff and I wrote a piece for
[Amit Varma]: you about Nagapattinam and just the horror there, just stepping over bodies.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this must have been four or five days after we get there, and the bodies are
[Amit Varma]: still there.
[Amit Varma]: And it's...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And VIPs are doing helicopter trips where they're literally helicoptering over and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, showing concern and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that was interesting.
[Amit Varma]: That was also interesting because I, you know, I was like, one thing I realized, and when
[Amit Varma]: I realized it, it just hit me hard and it never left me, was, and I wrote a very short
[Amit Varma]: post about it, was of stopped clocks, like across the coast of Tamil Nadu, when you went
[Amit Varma]: to affected villages and all that, you'd find that there were clocks that had stopped when
[Amit Varma]: the waves hit and they had stopped at different times.
[Amit Varma]: So almost by, you know, looking at these stopped clocks, you could see when disaster struck.
[Amit Varma]: Again, it's a static illustration of something so kind of momentous and one doesn't know
[Amit Varma]: what to make of that, but it's just for me, it's a kind of a powerful image.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I think that's the thing about it, right?
[Guest]: I mean, one of the other things that I learned was, we tend to think in story of story in
[Guest]: terms of, okay, this has to have a beginning, a middle and an end, and it has to have a
[Guest]: point and it has to have a takeaway.
[Guest]: Sometimes it is just something that is seen or heard or observed.
[Guest]: It doesn't have a point necessarily, but it is there.
[Guest]: And I realized that people identify the most with that kind of slice of life, if you will,
[Guest]: the story of the stop clock.
[Guest]: So for instance, on this walk with Paul, we had this experience where we left a place
[Guest]: called Hanumangarh and started the walk.
[Guest]: And our destination for that night was something that on Google, it said Tandi Guest House,
[Guest]: T-A-N-D-I, Guest House.
[Guest]: So we said, okay, there's a guest house.
[Guest]: So maybe we'll have a room to sleep in that night.
[Guest]: And so in Hanumangarh, I'd done something to my ankle and twisted it a little bit.
[Guest]: So I walked, I think about 20 to 25 kilometers.
[Guest]: This was about 35 kilometers away.
[Guest]: And towards that 25 kilometer marker is really struggling.
[Guest]: So Paul said, listen, why don't you hop on a passing tractor, go ahead and sort of fix
[Guest]: our place and all of that.
[Guest]: So I go to this place, and I realized there is no guest house, there's nothing.
[Guest]: And at the spot that Google indicates, all there was was there were about four shops
[Guest]: on one side of the road.
[Guest]: The rest of it is a gradient.
[Guest]: You can see fields everywhere.
[Guest]: And in the distance, a house here, a house there, very, very far off.
[Guest]: So at that point, I was kind of desperate because, I mean, what the hell are we supposed
[Guest]: to do that night, because there's nothing else, as far as we can see, when you look
[Guest]: at Google Maps from there.
[Guest]: So I was sitting in one of these shops had cigarettes and soft drinks.
[Guest]: And I was sitting there having a soft drink, and there was this old man who was looking
[Guest]: at me very curiously.
[Guest]: And suddenly he said, beta bahut pareshan lag raha hai, yo kya baat.
[Guest]: So I said, look, we came looking for this place called Tandi guest house, he wanted
[Guest]: to know who we were and what we were doing.
[Guest]: So I said, Gora Sabham is doing this, and there's this lady, Aarti, who's a photographer,
[Guest]: they're coming.
[Guest]: So I said, achha, that's your problem.
[Guest]: Okay, you sit here.
[Guest]: And he climbed on his rickety cycle and he went off.
[Guest]: A little while later, tempo comes from four, five people, including the old man.
[Guest]: One guy comes, comes up to me says, come with me.
[Guest]: The last shop in that line was actually a flour mill.
[Guest]: So he opens that rolling shutters, pulls it up, goes inside and there's those heaps of
[Guest]: flour all over the place, sacks of it and grain that hasn't yet been pounded.
[Guest]: He walks me through it, opens the rolling shutters at the back and outside there was
[Guest]: this hard packed earth compound with a surrounding wall, which is part of the property.
[Guest]: So he said, ye chalega kya aapko?
[Guest]: So we were like, yeah, cool.
[Guest]: I mean, we can put up our tents over there and it's there is a wall and there is a lock
[Guest]: and a gate and everything, right?
[Guest]: So we were like, yeah, tents are there.
[Guest]: So this guy just smiled at me and said, haan uske baare mein parashan matta ho, tum aur
[Guest]: kuch bhi ho.
[Guest]: And he got me some soft drinks.
[Guest]: We were sitting there talking.
[Guest]: A little while later, a small three-wheeler comes in and a bunch of kids hop out with
[Guest]: charpoys, four of them, blankets, sheets, pillows, and start setting them up.
[Guest]: Again, another half an hour, 45 minutes later, one huge lorry comes in with these massive
[Guest]: desert coolers.
[Guest]: They're almost your height.
[Guest]: I mean, it's that big, three of them.
[Guest]: And they set it up, they jerry-rig an electrical connection from inside the shop to connect
[Guest]: these things up.
[Guest]: And I was looking at this and I was telling these guys, yeh sab karne ki humein aadat
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: And he goes to just a tent and we can, in typical, the fashion of the, we keep saying
[Guest]: rural, which I find increasingly a pejorative term, but typical of people who live in the
[Guest]: great outdoors.
[Guest]: That guy just said, you're our guest, we're not going to let you just sleep on the ground
[Guest]: in some tent or whatever.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, Paul had come and we were sitting and talking and it turned out the head of
[Guest]: the clan, it was actually, Tandi is a clan.
[Guest]: All the people there have the surname Tandi.
[Guest]: They are one family, multiple branches, all engaged in agriculture.
[Guest]: So this guy, the oldest of them was actually living apparently in a village that got bifurcated
[Guest]: during partition on the border of Rajasthan.
[Guest]: He was a very small boy at the time and he talked about how this village was surrounded
[Guest]: by seven Muslim villages.
[Guest]: And one day the Muslims came to them and said, look, you guys don't have to worry.
[Guest]: If you want to stay put, we'll guarantee your safety.
[Guest]: If you want to migrate into deeper into India, we'll escort you to a place till you feel
[Guest]: safe and then we'll make sure that you're okay.
[Guest]: So he talked about his experiences of migrating and then trying to make a life somewhere and
[Guest]: finally landing up at this place and starting a family and all of that.
[Guest]: And Paul was sitting there taking notes.
[Guest]: At some point in between all this, Aarti was thinking about dinner.
[Guest]: So I don't know, she was saying, hey, you know what, we can actually call Hanuman Ghat,
[Guest]: the hotel that we were staying in and ask them to send some food in a car.
[Guest]: It's not that far, it's just 35 kilometers, right?
[Guest]: So one of the boys, and she was talking in English, one of the boys was hanging around
[Guest]: quickly, went over, then suddenly one man marched up and said, what are you talking
[Guest]: about ordering food from a hotel and all that?
[Guest]: Food is being provided, what, you thought we were going to let you starve?
[Guest]: And after a while there comes this, you know, you recently saw that thing, right, that Gujarati,
[Guest]: some cricket thali or whatever the greatest, biggest thali ever, this I swear was bigger.
[Guest]: And it had everything, it had the most incredible food I've tasted, it had kheer that was so
[Guest]: rich and creamy.
[Guest]: Everything has grown in the land, right, it was brilliant food.
[Guest]: And it was so thoughtful that they had a big bowl of curd and two small bowls, one of sugar,
[Guest]: one of salt.
[Guest]: And this lady was saying, we don't know whether you take it with salt or with sugar.
[Guest]: So we brought both.
[Guest]: And these ladies took, they made us eat, then told us, okay, next morning you come for breakfast
[Guest]: at our place.
[Guest]: So we were like, look, we have to start at five o'clock because after about 10.30, you
[Guest]: can't walk in the desert, when the sun is overhead, you wait.
[Guest]: So we have to start at five and all that.
[Guest]: And she was fairly pissed off.
[Guest]: And she said, what do you mean?
[Guest]: You said you came here to hear our stories, you're only listening to the men, you're not
[Guest]: coming and talking to us and all of that.
[Guest]: Next morning, four o'clock, we get up, we change into our traveling gear.
[Guest]: And we're loading the donkey that we had.
[Guest]: And suddenly the gate creaks open.
[Guest]: And the same women, a bunch of them, the matriarch, her daughters-in-law, daughters, grandchildren,
[Guest]: all of them come in, steaming flasks of tea.
[Guest]: And until then, we had never ever had tea or coffee before we set out because, I mean,
[Guest]: at five o'clock, who the hell is going to give it to you, right?
[Guest]: It's only in the cities that you get all of this.
[Guest]: These people had gotten up because they wanted to get here before we left.
[Guest]: So they were there by 4.30.
[Guest]: They would have gotten up at three o'clock, made tea, dressed in their best clothes, and
[Guest]: walked all the way to give us this tea.
[Guest]: I just looked at that tea and my eyes just cured up because, you know, if I was to tell
[Guest]: the story, what is the point?
[Guest]: But to me, it's one of the most, it's one of those moments that will live forever within
[Guest]: me because it's what we, I suppose, in a way, we miss, right, that unquestioned acceptance
[Guest]: of the other, that unquestioned reaching out, helping, doing things without being asked
[Guest]: to do things.
[Guest]: None of these are common in our world anymore, or at least not in the cities that we live
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: And when this kind of thing happens, you just carry it.
[Guest]: And at some point, I'll write about it, but I don't know what people will make of it,
[Guest]: but it's there.
[Amit Varma]: Those are the stories.
[Amit Varma]: It's a lovely story.
[Amit Varma]: And it kind of brings me to the theme of the kindness of strangers.
[Amit Varma]: Like just today, I think possibly responding to my episode with Ghazala Wahab, someone
[Amit Varma]: made a comment somewhere, I forget whether it was WhatsApp or Twitter or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was probably a message in one of my groups on WhatsApp, apologies because I've
[Amit Varma]: forgotten who said this.
[Amit Varma]: But they said that we are kinder to strangers and to our own people.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of got me thinking, like I remember when I, for example, in Pakistan, you know,
[Amit Varma]: barring one incident, my experience throughout was the kindness of people.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember we landed up there as journalists in Lahore, and we went to a store to buy like
[Amit Varma]: batteries and all of that basic things for our things.
[Amit Varma]: And the moment they realized that we are journalists from India, or the moment they realized we
[Amit Varma]: are from India, they refused to take any money, they simply refused, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, without even any rhetoric or mehman namazi or whatever, but they just refused
[Amit Varma]: and the warmth everywhere was pretty stunning and almost sort of instinctive.
[Amit Varma]: Where do you, I mean, you've travelled a lot, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm guessing you've sort of experienced the same sort of natural warmth that comes
[Amit Varma]: from strangers.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what's behind it?
[Amit Varma]: Are there cultural factors?
[Amit Varma]: Because it does seem to mitigate a lot of the toxic polarization that is around us in
[Amit Varma]: these times, that instinctively, we still reach out, we try to help other people, though
[Amit Varma]: having said that, I would say that if you're lost in traffic, never ask, in India, if you're
[Amit Varma]: lost in traffic, never ask someone for directions, because even if they don't know, they will
[Amit Varma]: feel compelled to give you some direction or the other and you will end up in the wrong
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: But that exception aside, you know, do you have any thoughts on, apart from the story
[Amit Varma]: you just told, it's almost like I'm asking a question after the answer.
[Amit Varma]: But what sort of explains this sort of kindness of strangers that we kind of get to see and
[Amit Varma]: is there another side to our nation and our culture, which is invisible to all of us or
[Amit Varma]: which doesn't get a chance to express itself?
[Guest]: It's an interesting question.
[Guest]: I don't quite know how to answer it.
[Guest]: But let me try.
[Guest]: So I live in this, it's an old building that was converted into apartments.
[Guest]: So it's just one apartment per floor.
[Guest]: The landlord lives above us, and I'm on the second floor.
[Guest]: You know, that guy is also a Mallu, the landlord.
[Guest]: He's from Kerala.
[Guest]: So you would think, and I've been living here for 10 years.
[Guest]: So you would think there is a lot that we have in common, right?
[Guest]: I mean, references for parotta, beef, and whiskey and all of that.
[Guest]: The funny thing is, we've not exchanged more than I would think, 300-400 words in all of
[Guest]: this time, because our relationship, by definition, is transactional.
[Guest]: He's the landlord, I'm the, I've leased this apartment every month, I have to make sure
[Guest]: that the rent is paid and the maintenance is done, and things like and that's it.
[Guest]: You see each other in the elevator, you say hi, and you hop off on your respective floors.
[Guest]: The same thing with people in this vicinity, you go out, there is that whole array of vegetable
[Guest]: sellers, but, and if you spend all your life just going there, you ask for the vegetables
[Guest]: you want to pay the money that they ask you, you come away, that's it.
[Guest]: But there was this, it was quite some time ago.
[Guest]: One guy was, so I bought vegetables, and I was buying some fruits.
[Guest]: And I was in my Hindi, and you know how pathetic that can be, I was trying to ask him for something
[Guest]: or the other, and he was, he was equally uncomfortable in Hindi, I don't even at this point in time
[Guest]: know why we started talking in Hindi in the first place, probably because I don't know
[Guest]: Kannada and English seemed an odd choice, right?
[Guest]: So Hindi seemed the lingua franca.
[Guest]: And while this conversation was going on, and I was fishing around for something, this
[Guest]: guy spoke to the chap sitting next to him in Tamil.
[Guest]: So I just said, look, if I'd known that you were in Tamil, why the hell was I, you know,
[Guest]: giving myself a log job trying to talk in a language I don't quite know.
[Guest]: And that guy started laughing and he said, boss, down the street, or pretty much anywhere
[Guest]: in Karnataka, Tamil goes, and on the street, we're all Tamils.
[Guest]: So the next time I passed by, he starts laughing and there was a wave and then there was this
[Guest]: lady who sells, you know, if I want things like broccoli and basil and all of that, there's
[Guest]: this one shop or this one lady who stocks all of that.
[Guest]: She came to hear of the story.
[Guest]: So she yelled out to me and said, ah, you are the Tamil who talks in Hindi.
[Guest]: And so I stood there and started exchanging conversation.
[Guest]: And now it is like the same transactional relationship.
[Guest]: Just because of that, that one moment of connect, it is changed into when we go there, we gossip.
[Guest]: So just this morning, I was there and we were talking about the Tamil Nadu election and
[Guest]: you know, all the nonsense that's going on over there.
[Guest]: I think it is not that we have to go to a strange place where somebody identifies us
[Guest]: as a stranger to be kind to us.
[Guest]: I think it is just that wherever you are, you are partly responsible for whether that
[Guest]: interaction is transactional, or whether it is human to human.
[Guest]: And the minute you make it human to human, it changes the dynamic.
[Guest]: It is just that we can't be bothered enough.
[Guest]: At least that is what I think about it, the way I see it, because I mean, even in Bangalore,
[Guest]: these ladies are like, you ask them for this, that, and the other, you pay the money, suddenly
[Guest]: you have an afterthought, oh, I need two limes.
[Guest]: She just takes two limes and tosses it in my bag and says, hey, I got it.
[Guest]: They do not really think about it.
[Guest]: There is a guy who sits next to these vegetable vendors who makes these chilli bajjis and
[Guest]: all of that in the daytime.
[Guest]: And occasionally, these ladies are, you know, buying stuff from him and eating.
[Guest]: And if I happen to go there at that time, they are like, huh, try this bajji, it is
[Guest]: damn good.
[Guest]: It is just fresh, hot off the tawa kind of thing.
[Guest]: And they give you a bajji, it is just, yeah, it works.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one of my feelings as a person, and this is probably true of most people, is the
[Amit Varma]: blindness to the armour and the blinkers that one wears normally.
[Amit Varma]: Like I guess what happened to you at that store is that, that armour sort of slipped
[Amit Varma]: for a moment and there is that human to human contact and that opens everything up.
[Amit Varma]: And most of the time we have that armour around us.
[Amit Varma]: And we're probably kind of not even unaware, like, you know, one of the tropes which kind
[Amit Varma]: of amuses me a lot is when journalists go to a foreign country or whatever, and their
[Amit Varma]: first report will be will come from talking to the taxi driver.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and there it's like, it's, they haven't let the armour go, it's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's almost a sort of condescension in that and just, you know, hey, tell me what
[Amit Varma]: your life is like, and what do you think of this, and then they'll make a report out of
[Amit Varma]: it, which is, you know, classic kind of lazy journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess one way of getting the maximum out of wherever we are is sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: letting those facades kind of slip away and just connecting, though much harder for introverts
[Amit Varma]: like me.
[Amit Varma]: So what is one to do?
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it's kind of amusing that, you know, when I start my podcast, I like to spend
[Amit Varma]: the first part of the show talking about my guests sort of intellectual journey where
[Amit Varma]: they grew up, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And now I realised this was like a start before the start, we're just discussing ideas and
[Unknown]: themes and, which is great.
[Amit Varma]: But let's kind of get to some of that journey as well, after a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great joys of the lockdown for me was discovering how much I enjoy teaching
[Amit Varma]: what I've learned over the years.
[Amit Varma]: And my online course, the art of clear writing is now open for registration.
[Amit Varma]: In this course, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction.
[Amit Varma]: And over the year that I've taught this course, a lively writing community has formed itself.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: And the April classes begin on April 3.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm having a delightfully digressive conversation with my old friend Prem Panekar about his
[Amit Varma]: kind of journey, a journey through life sounds so you know, so ponderous and serious.
[Amit Varma]: But let's let's kind of take me a little bit back to your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, even when I and I'm a fair bit younger than you.
[Amit Varma]: But when I look back to my own childhood, when I look back to the 80s, and the 90s,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, it doesn't seem like this world, everything is so different.
[Amit Varma]: It's like you don't have all the knowledge in the world on tap, you don't have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can't reach out to other people so much, you are trapped in communities of birth and
[Amit Varma]: circumstance rather than being able to form communities of choice as you and I have.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that's why you and I know each other.
[Amit Varma]: And so what were you growing up years, like you've already spoken a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: elders grandchild joint family, a lot of expectations, you know, and all of that is there.
[Amit Varma]: But what is your interior life like?
[Amit Varma]: What are you reading?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of music are you listening to?
[Amit Varma]: How do you end up being a drummer in a band?
[Guest]: Take me through some of that journey.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think I was born on the cusp of that 1958.
[Guest]: It was that hinge point in Kerala history when the joint family was breaking up.
[Guest]: So until that point in time, what you had was the patriarch and the matriarch controlling
[Guest]: everything and all the kids would be living under the same roof, working on the family
[Guest]: property, all of that.
[Guest]: The Hindu Succession Act, the Hindu Land Ceiling Act, all of that, I mean, the Land Ceiling
[Guest]: Act, the Hindu Succession Act, all of that came in and everything got scattered.
[Guest]: And for the children, it then became imperative that they go out and earn a living.
[Guest]: So dad migrated to, dad and his brother immediately next to him in age migrated to Chennai.
[Guest]: My uncle joined the public works department, my father joined the telephones department.
[Guest]: They met, this girl fell in love, made a huge drama at home saying, I'll either marry this
[Guest]: woman or I'll commit suicide and all of that stuff.
[Guest]: And so then I was, I was typically at that time, the woman goes to her mom's place for
[Guest]: delivery, right?
[Guest]: So I was born in a place called Chaplisheri in Palghar district.
[Guest]: And I think I was about five days old, three, five, I don't know how, very, very early,
[Guest]: they drove down to Calicut to my dad's place and left me in care of my grandparents.
[Guest]: So there were my grandparents, there were five other elders.
[Guest]: So the children and children's children of my grandmother by her first alliance.
[Guest]: And there was one uncle, there were about 10 adults, some five, six family retainers
[Guest]: and big house.
[Guest]: And I mean, you were talking about us not being able when you were young to form communities
[Guest]: of choice or to reach out to people and people like minded people and form interest groups
[Guest]: and all of that.
[Guest]: We didn't have electricity.
[Guest]: So basically, it was, you know, and it was kind of, for me, I think it was a kind of
[Guest]: definitive experience, because as it turned out, my grandparents, my uncle, a couple of
[Guest]: the other elders, they were all absolutely marvelous storytellers, they were Sanskrit
[Guest]: pundits.
[Guest]: They'd read the epics, the Vedas, the Puranas, all of that, and they'd gone beyond that.
[Guest]: So for instance, my uncle would start talking about the Mahabharata and suddenly related
[Guest]: to something from the Iliad, for instance, which he knew equally well.
[Guest]: So evenings that what we call the Kallu Valaku, Kallu is stone and Valaku is light, lamp.
[Guest]: That's the one that is kept in the central seating area, and everybody gathers around
[Guest]: it and those conversations going on and stories are being told.
[Guest]: So for me, I mean, like, unlike most people who sort of start reading stories before they
[Guest]: hear stories, for me, it was like, I grew up hearing stories.
[Guest]: And somewhere along the way, the rhythms of storytelling and all that came from that experience.
[Guest]: I think I was there till about, the thing was, dad and mom were both working, and neither
[Guest]: of them would have been able to care for a young child, which is why this happened.
[Guest]: I think I was about 11 and fairly able to manage for myself when I went over to Chennai
[Guest]: to my dad's place, and that came as a bit of a culture shock.
[Guest]: On the one hand, there was this huge house, while most of our land had gone away, there
[Guest]: was still the land surrounding the house, the usual mango trees and jack trees and you
[Guest]: know, all of that.
[Guest]: You are free to play and also that entire area in this place called Calicut, it was
[Guest]: our family.
[Guest]: So you could walk a mile in pretty much any direction without ever leaving the properties
[Guest]: of extended families.
[Guest]: So you had a ton of freedom, you just went out and wherever you happen to be, you walked
[Guest]: into that house and they knew you and, you know, fed you and amused you or whatever.
[Guest]: And then suddenly I was in this little apartment with I think, two or three rooms or some such.
[Guest]: You can't go out and play because it's the road is right there.
[Guest]: And I think that is when I started going inwards, started reading.
[Guest]: And on the good side, one was dad's voracious appetite for books, which meant that the house
[Guest]: was constantly stocked with books.
[Guest]: He was, today we talk about processes, how to inculcate these things in children and
[Guest]: all that.
[Guest]: I think he knew that intuitively.
[Guest]: So he taught me to read through a simple process of deprivation, comics that I look forward
[Guest]: to and which I would get a huge bundle of the day after the exams, they suddenly disappeared.
[Guest]: And there was just one book, it is called Dr. Sally by PG Woodhouse.
[Guest]: And he left it on the table and they both went to work.
[Guest]: I woke up later after the day after the exams, and I realized I had nothing to read.
[Guest]: I couldn't find the comics.
[Guest]: And I suppose I picked up this book and then put it down because there's no pictures or
[Guest]: whatever and then picked it up again, because what else can I do?
[Guest]: And I realized much, much later that dad had already taught me the basics of never bookmark
[Guest]: your, never fold your edges of the page, you always use a bookmark.
[Guest]: So he was looking at the bookmarks.
[Guest]: And when he realized that I had finished one book, another one would appear.
[Guest]: So Dr. Sally was followed by Laughing Gas, which was followed by something else.
[Guest]: And pretty soon, that was all I was doing.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't need comics.
[Guest]: And the other good thing about him was, I don't think he bothered to differentiate books
[Guest]: by age, to say, you're too young to be reading this.
[Guest]: So you're too young to be reading that.
[Guest]: So whatever was in his bookcase, and whatever took my fancy at that time, I just pulled
[Guest]: out and read.
[Guest]: So in between the PG Woodhouse books, and the Earl Stanley Gardner books, and Agatha
[Guest]: Christie and Henry Cecil, there were the Westerns, Louis L'Amour, Zane Grey, Max Brand, all of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I was also reading Faulkner and Somerset Maugham, and there would be Nathaniel Hawthorne, Raymond
[Guest]: Chandler, Nabokov.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, it wasn't a structured reading, and therefore, and I realized much
[Guest]: later that I'd read a lot of books before I was old enough or new enough to actually
[Guest]: appreciate them.
[Guest]: But at the same time, somehow they all gelled together.
[Guest]: And I think that is where the whole thing of, I just love how words combine into stories.
[Guest]: So you're reading everything from at one end, Dostoyevsky, at the other end, Dickens.
[Guest]: And in between, there is all this Pulp Fiction and stuff, and new books would keep coming
[Guest]: in Malayalam literature as well.
[Guest]: So I had that transcultural experience.
[Guest]: And Christian High School, I think the time my life went off the rails was, I was good
[Guest]: academically without actually trying, I had a retentive memory.
[Guest]: So you read a chapter once in a textbook, and you pretty much knew what it was about.
[Guest]: So I was acing my exams, and that I think started all these ambitions.
[Guest]: That is where this whole eldest grandchild thing comes from.
[Guest]: Dad and mom typically dreamt in terms of medicine and surgery and things.
[Guest]: And there was this uncle of mine who wanted me to be in the army.
[Guest]: And I remember this family discussion where they finally settled on, okay, he will be
[Guest]: an army surgeon.
[Guest]: Yeah, but the thing is, I hated that whole idea.
[Guest]: And it struck me with the greatest force when your electives begin in 10th standard, we
[Guest]: had 11 plus one, in 10th standard, you elect for the science stream, which I had to do
[Guest]: because of this whole, he will become a doctor thing.
[Guest]: And you have these practicals where you have to cut open cockroaches and stuff.
[Guest]: And that just filled me with a kind of revulsion.
[Guest]: By then I was playing sport, and our college is fairly encouraging of all kinds of cultural
[Guest]: activities.
[Guest]: So I was doing a bit of theater as playing cricket, badminton, football.
[Guest]: And there was somewhere along the way, I think I progressed almost without knowing it from
[Guest]: cigarettes to dope to hard drugs.
[Guest]: And by the time I got to my pre degree, which was in Madras Christian, I was addicted.
[Guest]: And I had this moment where I don't quite know what happened.
[Guest]: What we used to do during those days is you're taking hard drugs.
[Guest]: And you also carry downers like mandrakes, for instance, mandrakes was the drug of choice
[Guest]: at that time to bring yourself down.
[Guest]: So there would always be a strip of mandrakes in my pocket.
[Guest]: And apparently, one day, I didn't go to college at all.
[Guest]: I I've taken some drugs, I don't I don't have very clear recollections of what exactly happened.
[Guest]: What I do know is that mom went to office and she developed a migraine.
[Guest]: So she came back home and she found me lying on bed with froth coming out of my mouth and
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: Two doors away, there was a doctor, his home was there and he happened to be at home.
[Guest]: So he came in, he got my stomach flushed out or whatever it is and revived me.
[Guest]: And at some point, he told me you were about five minutes away from dying.
[Guest]: And if your mom hadn't come home, you were gone.
[Guest]: Apparently, I'd swallowed an entire strip of mandrakes for I don't know what reason.
[Guest]: I mean, subsequently, it was theorized that I was trying to commit suicide.
[Guest]: I don't have any recollection of that.
[Guest]: But yeah, then I was sent back to Calicut to be with my grandparents on the assumption
[Guest]: that that kind of influence would be good for me and stuff.
[Guest]: But the ambitions of others for me didn't die.
[Guest]: All that happened was, okay, fine, he doesn't want to study science, let him study history,
[Guest]: economics, double name, and then sit for the IAS exam, which again, it didn't appeal to
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: The problem was that the family would sit around and talk about me and I would be there
[Guest]: and they were talking about me, but not to me.
[Guest]: And what I had to say that I was interested in English literature, which is what I wanted
[Guest]: to take and nobody was willing to listen to that.
[Guest]: The comment would be, what are you going to do, become a teacher in some school?
[Guest]: What's English literature got to do with things?
[Guest]: So I went to college for what it was worth.
[Guest]: There was a six month period of recovery, I had to get the drugs out of my system.
[Guest]: Then I rejoined college, and I just went Nam Keva state.
[Guest]: I went around playing the drums with a sort of ensemble group, played sevens football,
[Guest]: which is very lucrative, those days, played cricket when I could.
[Guest]: And the first year was languages, English and Hindi, which I did comfortably sail through.
[Guest]: The second year was history, which I aced because I love history.
[Guest]: And the third year was economics.
[Guest]: And I just couldn't understand why I mean, I understood that part of economics syllabus,
[Guest]: which had to do with the theories of economics.
[Guest]: But there was a subject called Indian economics, which, for some reason, I was expected to
[Guest]: know the production of rice, and wheat and pulses in India from the time of independence
[Guest]: all the way to whenever that time textbook was written, with no explanation about why
[Guest]: these spikes or dips happened, and it was taught by probably one person who should never
[Guest]: have been allowed anywhere near a college.
[Guest]: You just, you know, memorize whatever it was the previous night and then come and regurgitate
[Guest]: it in class.
[Guest]: So I just dropped out.
[Guest]: I, as long as college was there, I kept going and doing all the fun things that I like to
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: And then I didn't write the exam, which I think for my family was the final straw.
[Guest]: So then I came back to Madras and yeah, life was, like I said before, somewhat fraught.
[Guest]: Mom stopped talking to me, my dad's conversations would be purely functional, do this, do that,
[Guest]: go to the shop and get this, whatever.
[Guest]: And I think that is when it hit me that there was no prospects in those days for somebody
[Guest]: who didn't have a degree or a certificate of some kind.
[Guest]: So for a while I was a steward in a restaurant and then I was playing the drums for a band
[Guest]: in a hotel.
[Guest]: I gave that up because I remember back then you didn't have these cassettes and stuff.
[Guest]: So what you knew about music was what you heard on Radio Ceylon and there was one program
[Guest]: on Indian radio.
[Guest]: So they would have this top 10, right?
[Guest]: So everybody heard the top 10 and knew those songs.
[Guest]: You knew Hotel California because it was top of the pops, you knew the thing.
[Guest]: So when you're playing in a five-star hotel like Chola, the people who come there are
[Guest]: the people who can afford it and those days not everybody afforded five-star hotels just
[Guest]: on a whim.
[Guest]: And these guys would come and they would want to impress whoever they were with, with their
[Guest]: knowledge of music.
[Guest]: So they would send up a request, right?
[Guest]: There was a song called One Way Ticket back in the day and that was top of the pops at
[Guest]: that time.
[Guest]: It was played every single day and there was one night when I had to play that song seven
[Guest]: times because it was requested seven times.
[Guest]: I just, at the end of that night, I just chucked the stick, I said, look, I can't do this anymore.
[Guest]: And I walked out of that.
[Guest]: I was telephone operator for a bit because I mean, dad and mom were both in telephones
[Guest]: and so I hung around there and learned that one.
[Guest]: But that got boring.
[Guest]: I mean, how many times are you going to say, hello, this is Amarath, how can I help you?
[Guest]: So, and around that time, there was, Indian Express had a page called Youth Ink, which
[Guest]: is a combination of youth and ink.
[Guest]: It was for young people to write in, fairly bad construct, but it is what it was.
[Guest]: I was attracted by a particular writer who was writing under the name Andulika Dove.
[Guest]: Andulika is a Kannada, there's a Raga, very rare and Dove comes from Dove Lando, from
[Guest]: Ayn Rand.
[Guest]: So I liked the pieces that started coming and I remember I wrote a letter to the editor
[Guest]: about one of those pieces.
[Guest]: Next thing I know, I get a postcard from this lady called Aditi Dey, who was then the editor
[Guest]: of this page and the features page.
[Guest]: She said, if possible, can you come and see me?
[Guest]: So I went to her and she said, I love the way you've composed this letter, do you write?
[Guest]: So I said, I don't know.
[Guest]: I have never really written, written outside of college essays or whatever it is.
[Guest]: So she said, will you write for me?
[Guest]: And she started giving me these little assignments for that page.
[Guest]: And that started becoming fun and I think that is when I realized that, okay, this seems
[Guest]: like something I want to do.
[Guest]: You think shut down for some reason or the other.
[Guest]: By the time I met Abraham Irali, again, Aditi Dey sent me to Abraham Irali, who was running
[Guest]: a city magazine called Asaid.
[Guest]: So he would give me a few assignments and the thing is, I was getting to write, but
[Guest]: I wasn't really getting, the pay was abysmal and it was not a full-fledged form of livelihood.
[Guest]: There was a guy from the Indian Express called Vijay Shekhar, who was a brilliant journalist
[Guest]: and a chronic drunk.
[Guest]: I mean, he was a film journalist primarily, but he was actually brilliant, absolutely
[Guest]: stunningly good writer.
[Guest]: He literally brushes his teeth with alcohol.
[Guest]: So he got kicked out of his job and he conceived of this idea of starting a broadsheet with
[Guest]: almost zero funds, starting a broadsheet, which was on South cinema in English.
[Guest]: And for the people of that time, it was very rare for the stars of that time to be written
[Guest]: about in English because the Bollywood press never bothered with them.
[Guest]: So the film fairs and all that, they never appeared.
[Guest]: So suddenly we found ourselves on friendly terms with pretty much all the big actors
[Guest]: and actresses of that time.
[Guest]: People like Mammootty and Mohanlal, Nadumudi Venu, all of those from Malayalam, people
[Guest]: like Kamal and Rajni and Prabhu.
[Guest]: And they were all very supportive.
[Guest]: All we had was an electric typewriter.
[Guest]: So we typed the story into the typewriter and then we cut sheets of paper in galley
[Guest]: size, printed it out that way.
[Guest]: And because you don't have adjustable font sizes, you only have a single font.
[Guest]: So you have to work within a grid with room for expansion.
[Guest]: So when you took it to the plate makers, they would expand it to the actual size.
[Guest]: And we kind of figured it out on the go.
[Guest]: So you learned a lot about production, about cropping pictures and about sizing and fitting
[Guest]: things in columns and all of that.
[Guest]: So we'd spend all day on the sets.
[Guest]: We had lunch there.
[Guest]: We drank with the stars, then came back and wrote whatever we wanted.
[Guest]: Among other things, funnily enough, I learned a lesson in ethics, a very early lesson in
[Guest]: ethics because there was this character actor and director called Kuchan Hanifa, Kuchan
[Guest]: because he is from Kuchan in Malayalam.
[Guest]: The guy was making his first feature film.
[Guest]: And I went to the set and said, Hanifa, I want to do a story on your movie.
[Guest]: What's it about?
[Guest]: So he promptly called one of his assistants and said, give this boy all the pictures,
[Guest]: you know, all of that.
[Guest]: And in about two minutes, he told me what the story was.
[Guest]: I said, look, this was supposed to be a center spread.
[Guest]: Let's talk a little bit.
[Guest]: He said, this is all I know.
[Guest]: This is what the story is.
[Guest]: You don't ask me questions.
[Guest]: I said, how am I going to fill up the space?
[Guest]: He said, you write what you want.
[Guest]: So I must have been particularly drunk that day.
[Guest]: What I ended up doing was an interview where Kuchan Hanifa expounds on international cinema,
[Guest]: on Kurosawa, Eisenstein, none of it.
[Guest]: So and it was printed and we would distribute it ourselves.
[Guest]: So we took it to various bookstands and some of the radio stations and all that and placed
[Guest]: it there, just Shekhar and I.
[Guest]: And suddenly, I walk into the office, office is Shekhar's house, one room in that house.
[Guest]: And there's a message for me, call Kuchan Hanifa urgently.
[Guest]: So call the set and get him on the phone.
[Guest]: I said, what happened?
[Guest]: Come and see me.
[Guest]: So I go there.
[Guest]: As soon as he sees me, he grabs me, takes me aside and says, who the hell is this Kurosawa?
[Guest]: So I said, okay, what happened?
[Guest]: He said, people are coming and asking me questions.
[Guest]: Now some Tamil journalist came and asked me, can you talk more about Kurosawa?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: What have you gone and written?
[Guest]: I said, you told me to, you know, make an interview.
[Guest]: So I made an interview.
[Guest]: And then Shekhar told me, don't do this.
[Guest]: You don't make up quotes ever.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, talk of learning on the job, it is one of those things.
[Guest]: And after a bit, it just folded because the way we were bringing it out, we didn't have
[Guest]: money for the paper for the printing and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So we would go to people like G V Prakash, G V, sorry, who's Maniratnam's elder brother,
[Guest]: who used to run G V Films and say, look, we don't have enough money for the next edition.
[Guest]: And the guy would just give you a couple of ads and give you the money, right?
[Guest]: Even if he didn't have a movie in the works, it would be just a G V Films kind of ad.
[Guest]: Prabhu's brother, again, was very helpful that way.
[Guest]: Pretty much all the producers, sometimes the actors would step in and talk to the producer
[Guest]: and say, give this boy an ad, whatever.
[Guest]: So beyond a point, it just became untenable.
[Guest]: So there was about a period of three and a half, four years when I had nothing to do.
[Guest]: The one thing I did was attend an interview at Indian Express for a trainee journalist.
[Guest]: And the first thing they asked me, so what have you studied?
[Guest]: I said, I'm a college dropout.
[Guest]: And they said, oh, we're looking for graduates in literature.
[Guest]: And that was the end of that interview.
[Guest]: So yeah, 1989 somehow lucked out and there was a friend of my father's who was in Bombay
[Guest]: who called me once and said, look, there's this paper called Free Press Journal.
[Guest]: Not too many people read it, but they do want people and would you like to come over?
[Guest]: I said, so what are they paying me?
[Guest]: They said 750 bucks.
[Guest]: So I said, how the hell am I supposed to live in Bombay on 750?
[Guest]: He said, you can stay with me, that's not a problem.
[Guest]: And he said, you wanted a chance, there is a chance if you make it, you make it.
[Guest]: So I had nothing to lose.
[Guest]: I just went in.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's that's pretty much.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a delightful story.
[Amit Varma]: And again, lots to sort of think about in there.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll come back to your career later.
[Amit Varma]: But I kind of want to go back to your earlier days, like one story that really struck me,
[Amit Varma]: which you spoke about was how your father would recognize from the bookmarks, how far
[Amit Varma]: you had gone down a book.
[Amit Varma]: And when you finished a book, there would be sort of a new book.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember when I was a kid, and we were in Chandigarh, where my dad was in the IAS.
[Amit Varma]: And he'd go to Delhi every once in a while.
[Amit Varma]: And he had and this is in the 80s, right pre liberalization and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And he had hit upon these, this dude somewhere there, because he was a big patron of bookshops
[Amit Varma]: and all that got lots of books.
[Amit Varma]: So he had hit upon a guy who would sell him old editions of Marvel Comics.
[Amit Varma]: So what he would do is he'd buy big bunches of Marvel Comics every time he went, but he
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't show them to me right up, he'd give them in dribs and drabs.
[Amit Varma]: So he'd give me a bunch.
[Amit Varma]: And when I had finished that, and when I was suitably bored and made enough of a noise,
[Amit Varma]: he'd give me another bunch.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the pretense was that he doesn't have any more.
[Amit Varma]: But I always knew that, of course, you know, they are there somewhere or the other.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, tell me a little bit about your father, tell me a little bit about your mother,
[Amit Varma]: what was that sort of, like, because, you know, another thing that kind of happens to
[Amit Varma]: us as we go through life is that our parents, we form an image of them.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, we maybe edit it slightly as we go along, and we grow older, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: experience more life.
[Amit Varma]: But essentially, they are always kind of that whatever the image we have drawn of them is,
[Amit Varma]: and it's sometimes hard to even be able to think of them as flesh and blood human beings
[Amit Varma]: as flawed indeed, in many ways, or as, you know, to us, they are like fixed points in
[Amit Varma]: space, maybe complex points, maybe, you know, there's good and there's bad.
[Amit Varma]: But that's what they are, like, I recently came across a picture of my parents when we'd
[Amit Varma]: gone to when we'd made a trip to America in the early 80s, I think in 84, or something
[Amit Varma]: like that.
[Amit Varma]: And so there are my parents and, and I kind of looked at that picture.
[Amit Varma]: And for a moment, then I did a calculation.
[Amit Varma]: And I said, Oh, my God, at the time, this picture is taken, my father was younger than
[Amit Varma]: I am now.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, you know that.
[Amit Varma]: So how was that relationship like?
[Amit Varma]: What were your parents like?
[Amit Varma]: What was your father like?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I imagine there is a certain kind of love and caring, which the bookmark story
[Amit Varma]: illustrates, but there is also deep disappointment.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and you know, not all of it sort of undeserved, given the kind of things that
[Amit Varma]: you were up to.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: No, you're right.
[Guest]: It was deserved.
[Guest]: Actually, today is what, March 17, March 16 1997 is when my dad passed, when I was busy
[Guest]: covering the India series in the West Indies, the famous 81, not all out and all of that.
[Guest]: Dad, Dad was a quintessential product of Kerala, old world values, value, truth and justice
[Guest]: and honesty.
[Guest]: And he was at one point, I think, either the head or number two in a Narasimha Shaka.
[Guest]: He was religious.
[Guest]: He was, I think, the fundamental, the core of my dad's being was that he went at a time
[Guest]: when he was doing brilliantly academically, his world fell apart, and he was suddenly
[Guest]: in the position of having to actually go and start making a living.
[Guest]: So our family, so my grandmother had one sister, and both the, you call it a Tharavad, the
[Guest]: ancestral property, the Tharavads were joining.
[Guest]: My grandmother's sister's children, one of them became the principal of the Calicut Medical
[Guest]: College.
[Guest]: One was chief secretary to the government of Kerala.
[Guest]: One who still is alive, he's one of India's foremost orthopedic surgeons, he used to teach
[Guest]: at American universities and medical colleges and stuff.
[Guest]: Brilliant guy.
[Guest]: They were all like that.
[Guest]: They were fabulously, they were all brilliant, and they accomplished a lot.
[Guest]: And I think it stayed with my dad that he could have been that, he and his brothers,
[Guest]: they were all bright, all smart, all extremely erudite.
[Guest]: But by an accident of fate, when they were pretty young, they had to go and start making
[Guest]: a living.
[Guest]: And my mom, again, highly traditional.
[Guest]: So there is a concept among the Nambudris called Kovilamma, which is the women attached
[Guest]: to a temple.
[Guest]: So there's a temple in Chhatracheri, my mom's place.
[Guest]: And my mom's maiden name was Rukmini Kovilamma.
[Guest]: The family was part of the temple, or the temple was part of the family, whichever way
[Guest]: you want to look at it.
[Guest]: And she had, again, those same old world values.
[Guest]: In her case, she was a kind of savant, I suppose you call it, of things like arithmetic and
[Guest]: stuff like that.
[Guest]: She was absolutely brilliant.
[Guest]: And she wasn't telephones.
[Guest]: One of the things that we used to laugh about was the fact that she had the entire telephone
[Guest]: book memorized.
[Guest]: You pretty much ask any number, literally, she just reels off numbers, anything to do
[Guest]: with numbers.
[Guest]: She was amazing.
[Guest]: But again, family reasons, stopped studies when she was pretty young, came to Madras.
[Guest]: And ultimately ended up joining telephones, which is where she and dad met.
[Guest]: They complemented each other in a lot of ways, because my mom's governing nature was a kind
[Guest]: of placidity, calm.
[Guest]: She was unfazed by pretty much anything.
[Guest]: She had a very even temper.
[Guest]: My dad was, his drug of choice was adrenaline, I think he had these highs and lows, fiery
[Guest]: kind of temper.
[Guest]: And at the same time, the next minute, it would all cool down.
[Guest]: And earlier, we were talking about, you know, the kindness of strangers.
[Guest]: Dad went out of his way to help people who he didn't even know.
[Guest]: So it was only after dad passed, and people started coming home to control, we met people
[Guest]: we didn't even realize existed.
[Guest]: And they would tell us stories about how their kid, something happened, and dad went understood
[Guest]: them and or something in the family and the many ways in which exactly like this uncle
[Guest]: who passed away recently, those two brothers were very alike.
[Guest]: I think that that is why their marriage was so very strong.
[Guest]: And that is also probably why mom pretty much collapsed once that passed.
[Guest]: It is only in the early 2000s that she started getting dementia.
[Guest]: But her zest for life pretty much ended in 97 when dad passed away.
[Guest]: I think for all that I was hurt by the fact that my parents couldn't see my point of view
[Guest]: and couldn't have a rational conversation with me about why are you doing these things?
[Guest]: And what is it that you want to do?
[Guest]: I think they were equally seen from a distance, they would have equally been baffled and hurt
[Guest]: by the fact that these are opportunities they didn't get.
[Guest]: And they sacrificed a lot to give it to me and I was just throwing it away.
[Guest]: So that I think is what made the relationship go sour.
[Guest]: I hadn't seen or talked to my father for about from 1989 to 97 when he passed, we were completely
[Guest]: estranged.
[Guest]: It's only when I went for his funeral that mom and I again started talking to each other
[Guest]: and all of that stuff.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think they had an enviably rock solid relationship.
[Guest]: And I think the lucky one was my sister because while there was no articulation of this, I
[Guest]: think they also realized at some point that children need to be given some space to think
[Guest]: and grow and be themselves.
[Guest]: And so everything that happened with me, the reverse happened with my sister, she was allowed
[Guest]: to be whatever she wanted, she was allowed to study what she wanted.
[Guest]: She was given a degree of freedom that I never got.
[Guest]: So for me, withholding of freedom was a kind of punishment for whatever.
[Guest]: And I don't thrive within four walls, I need my space.
[Guest]: Somebody figured that out.
[Guest]: And this was the one punishment that would always hurt me when I was grounded.
[Guest]: In my sister's case, it was the exact opposite.
[Guest]: So yeah, I add, like you said, it's a composite, complex kind of picture.
[Guest]: I think at the end of the day, it is, I would think that my parents suffered mostly from
[Guest]: having been brought up in a particular kind of environment.
[Guest]: And then having to suddenly come to terms with a completely different way of life, of
[Guest]: making their own way of not having, you know, in traditional families, one brother has problems,
[Guest]: the others, the extended family is there to help.
[Guest]: But once the family fell apart, financially, all of that changed.
[Guest]: So it was everyone to himself, it became an atomic family, as opposed to a joint family.
[Guest]: They never really came to terms with all that it meant.
[Guest]: And that, I think, at the same time, having to bring up a fairly volatile kid, even at
[Guest]: my best, I was kind of, you know, I had my moments.
[Guest]: So all of that, I think, at a time when they were struggling to do what the normal middle
[Guest]: class couple is trying to do, you know, raise a kid, educate, have two kids, educate them,
[Guest]: build a house, all of that, to have to cope with me must have been a bit much.
[Amit Varma]: So question at two levels.
[Amit Varma]: And one level is this, that, you know, it's poignant when, like you describe your parents,
[Amit Varma]: they're at a time where they're living through so much change, like one, your kids are going
[Amit Varma]: in these different directions as the world is changing.
[Amit Varma]: So it might be hard for them to kind of comprehend exactly what's going on, you know, joint families
[Amit Varma]: become nuclear families, it becomes everything becomes atomic, the kids go off in directions
[Amit Varma]: they don't understand, and they're kind of beveled out by it all.
[Amit Varma]: So one, you know, do you feel that, you know, looking at that as an analogue for where we
[Amit Varma]: are today, do you keep worrying that that might happen to you?
[Amit Varma]: Like in multiple ways, do you fear that you're turning into your parents, or you're turning
[Amit Varma]: into your father as, as they say about many men, that, you know, they kind of turn into
[Amit Varma]: their fathers.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a question at two levels.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, at the level of character and at the level of, you know, all those similarities
[Amit Varma]: you might notice, but the other level also is that kind of existential sort of confusion
[Amit Varma]: or angst or whatever that the times are changing so fast, like, and I'm asking this because
[Amit Varma]: even though I am relatively young, I'm in my 40s, but I, I keep telling myself that
[Amit Varma]: I have to keep, you know, I've seen, you know, older people, I've seen my father struggle
[Amit Varma]: with technology and just be beveled out and therefore feel lost because he can't handle
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And I keep telling myself that, look, when, when I am that old, if I get that far, I don't
[Amit Varma]: want to be so helpless.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to be so, you know, adrift and all of that and, and that is a fear and one
[Amit Varma]: doesn't know what to even sort of how one is going to kind of navigate that.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you've thought about or something that's there somewhere?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think not now.
[Guest]: I think those thoughts were actually in my mid to late 20s before I'd actually settled
[Guest]: on one of the side effects of doing the kind of things that I used to do, play sport at
[Guest]: a fairly decent level or act in plays and play the drums on stage and stuff like that.
[Guest]: You end up, it's quite easy to make friends with girls.
[Guest]: So there were always some relationship or the other going on right and I never wanted
[Guest]: anything permanent until 1988 when I met Rajiv for the first time and then we started sort
[Guest]: of seeing each other exclusively.
[Guest]: But even then I was reluctant to commit because I didn't want kids.
[Guest]: That was my fear that I would turn into my parents that with the best will in the world.
[Guest]: If I see my, it's one thing to say kids deserve their freedom.
[Guest]: But I kept thinking what if this kid of mine starts doing something that I personally don't
[Guest]: agree with.
[Guest]: Will I remember my own experiences and let him be or will I sort of do what all parents
[Guest]: do which is say, you know, we know best, this is not what you should be doing and all of
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So one of the reasons why we took about three and a half years of knowing each other before
[Guest]: we finally got married was because I never asked and one day it accidentally in course
[Guest]: of a conversation that suddenly came up, she said, you know, I've been thinking of settling
[Guest]: down with you but there's this one thing I don't want kids and I know that most men want
[Guest]: kids and I was like, oh God, you could have told me this two and a half years ago and
[Guest]: saved me a lot of hard work.
[Guest]: So we got lucky that way but at a larger level, yeah, I'm now 63 and, you know, I can think
[Guest]: back to a time when 63 was considered old, you looked on them as your family elder and
[Guest]: stuff right.
[Guest]: So suddenly I realized that I'm that now and I do have that fear of, for one, there are
[Guest]: three people in my immediate family who have had dementia and before they passed, including
[Guest]: my mom was the last.
[Guest]: So there's always been that even if you accidentally forget a name of a book or a thing and suddenly
[Guest]: you're like, oh my God, so you do a lot of trying to recollect things just deliberately
[Guest]: to see if your memory is still working and that is one part of it.
[Guest]: The other part of it is that other helplessness that you were talking about, a physical helplessness.
[Guest]: So for all that, yeah, the smoking and stuff apart, there are things that I've stopped
[Guest]: doing.
[Guest]: I no longer drink at home by myself, but I haven't done that for the last 10, 15 years
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: I have a beautifully stocked bar, but it's only when somebody comes in.
[Guest]: Even that is very rare because I've been increasingly, I think, distanced from pretty much everybody
[Guest]: I don't have.
[Guest]: You remember when back in the day, when we were all in Bombay, we used to hang out in
[Guest]: each other's homes, sit and talk late into the night till 1 o'clock, 2 o'clock and drunk.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I honestly missed that so much.
[Amit Varma]: I remember Anand Ramchandran, Sumant, all the bunch of us, Chandrahas and those were
[Amit Varma]: lovely times.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's now a memory.
[Guest]: I don't do that anymore.
[Guest]: I don't go out for these things.
[Guest]: I basically find spending an evening drinking alcohol that I don't really need and ending
[Guest]: up talking of the same political tropes over and over again, it just seems so pointless
[Guest]: to me.
[Guest]: I don't get any fun out of it.
[Guest]: I come back and say, what the hell was I doing?
[Guest]: I could have read a book in this time.
[Guest]: But there is a certain consciousness that I don't want to or I can't afford to be physically
[Guest]: helpless.
[Guest]: So with all of this, I still do, I go out for long walks, or I work out at home.
[Guest]: I keep track of my fitness.
[Guest]: And that fear is ever present.
[Guest]: Also probably because I think, at least in dad's time, even though the family was fragmented
[Guest]: and his brothers were all in different parts of the thing, there was still, they all grew
[Guest]: up with that sense of closeness and tightness and stuff.
[Guest]: There's just me and my sister, she has her own life, her kids to look after, her husband
[Guest]: who recently had a heart attack, so she has that on her mind.
[Guest]: So I realized that I don't have the kind of automatic support system that the previous
[Guest]: generation had.
[Guest]: So that consciousness, that fear is kind of ever present, losing the ability to think,
[Guest]: to write, to function.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to untangling one of the strands which kind of struck me when you were talking
[Amit Varma]: earlier about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: And this goes back right to the very start where you spoke about how you grew up in a
[Amit Varma]: home where stories were being told all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we have a windowpane episode releasing soon on YouTube where you speak
[Amit Varma]: about this at length about the influence of storytelling on your writing.
[Amit Varma]: So I won't go into that here.
[Amit Varma]: But what I am interested in is a couple of tangential things.
[Amit Varma]: One is, what role does language play in even the way that we write in English, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I have sort of grown up reading English all the time, you know, you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about how you would serendipitously discover serious writers, because you were basically
[Amit Varma]: reading everything.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you know, my introduction to serious literature was when I came across Dostoevsky's
[Amit Varma]: House of the Dead in my father's library.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, that sounds like a fun book, and it just completely changed who I was.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that year, I read all of Dostoevsky, most of the other Russian stuff from that
[Amit Varma]: era, all of Shakespeare, even by the time before I turned 11, though I probably didn't
[Amit Varma]: get most of it.
[Amit Varma]: But a parallel layer for many of us on that, are the languages, whatever those languages
[Amit Varma]: are.
[Amit Varma]: And with me, it was mostly English, really.
[Amit Varma]: So I didn't have the benefit of that.
[Amit Varma]: I wish I had immersed myself more into literature and some of the languages or culture and some
[Amit Varma]: of the languages, because I think that has an enriching kind of influence.
[Amit Varma]: What was it like for you in terms of maybe Malayalam literature or Tamil literature or
[Amit Varma]: Hindi?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I guess you wouldn't have read much in Hindi, though you did mention you were,
[Amit Varma]: you did well in school in it.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you feel all of that influences you?
[Amit Varma]: Because a writer writing in English in the Western world has only the world of English.
[Amit Varma]: A writer writing in English in India has all these other worlds.
[Guest]: I remember when I went to college, the first day of college, there was this absolutely
[Guest]: brilliant English professor, George Matthew.
[Guest]: He walked into class and said, Okay, I want to get to know you guys.
[Guest]: So one by one, just talk, tell me about yourselves.
[Guest]: And also hit some of the high spots like, you know, what's your mother tongue, what's
[Guest]: your thing.
[Guest]: And this one boy stood up and when he came to the mother tongue part, he said English.
[Guest]: And George Matthew looked up and said, his name was Ram Subramanian, or some such.
[Guest]: So he said, What the hell do you mean by English, and he said, Look, I mean, I read, I write,
[Guest]: I think and I dream in English.
[Guest]: So I don't know what else to say.
[Guest]: I don't even I can't read my mother tongue, Tamil.
[Guest]: So English is my mother tongue and and that made me think of what mother tongue really
[Guest]: means.
[Guest]: Is it the inherited language or is it the language that you're most at home in?
[Guest]: If the latter definition holds true, then it would be English because I think in English.
[Guest]: At the same time, by some fluke, I've retained my knowledge of and ability to communicate
[Guest]: in whatever brand of Malayalam and Tamil you choose from the highly literary to the absolute
[Guest]: street.
[Guest]: The thing though is, it's opened me to new ways of writing, it has opened me to a whole
[Guest]: lot of different styles and voice and even themes.
[Guest]: One of the things about Malayalam literature is the way they can be talked about this in
[Guest]: the earlier before the before the ad break, if you remember about these little stories
[Guest]: that mean so much and Malayalam literature and Malayalam films are full of these kind
[Guest]: of stories.
[Guest]: Just I haven't been watching too many films of late, but a couple of days back, my wife
[Guest]: insisted that I watch something called Katti Olaan Ende Maalaga, which basically translates
[Guest]: into the woman I married is my angel.
[Guest]: It is a story of a boy in a village in an agrarian sort of environment, just him and
[Guest]: his mom, his two sisters are married and gone.
[Guest]: And he has reached the age of 35 without ever being in a relationship, ever being able to
[Guest]: carry on a conversation with a woman other than his immediate family.
[Guest]: And he keeps stalling whenever the subject of marriage comes up.
[Guest]: And then finally, one day he sees one of those typical arranged things, he sees a woman who
[Guest]: he actually wants to marry.
[Guest]: He does.
[Guest]: And then he doesn't know what to do with them, in the sense of he doesn't know how sex works.
[Guest]: And all he has is the village loafers and you know, the kind of hangers on and stuff
[Guest]: and somewhere this sticks in his head.
[Guest]: So he makes all kinds of excuses on his honeymoon night, he pretends to be having high fever.
[Guest]: And he just stays in bed for two days, while this girl is like running around and getting
[Guest]: him food and thing and he says, I can't get up and shivering and all of that.
[Guest]: He's just he's just making excuses not to be with her.
[Guest]: And then somewhere he overhears a conversation about how women like men who are strong and
[Guest]: does that and he misinterprets that.
[Guest]: He gets drunk, he goes home and he rapes his wife.
[Guest]: And it is fairly brutal, to the point where she ends up in hospital.
[Guest]: And that becomes a huge problem.
[Guest]: And the entire movie is about how these two people, how he breaks out of his shell, or
[Guest]: how he is gradually taken out of a shell and taught what real life is all about.
[Guest]: And how she gets to understand where he was coming from when this happened.
[Guest]: It's not a justification of marital rape or even rape.
[Guest]: But it is a process of understanding and a kind of mutual accommodation that happens
[Guest]: at some point.
[Guest]: But it was all based on that one little trivial incident.
[Guest]: So that's what Malayalam literature gave me.
[Guest]: Tamil literature was what I've read.
[Guest]: And honestly, I haven't read the contemporary authors.
[Guest]: My knowledge of Tamil literature would be the Tamil epics.
[Guest]: And a couple of established writers like Sujatha, for instance, who has a huge body of work.
[Guest]: They do epic very well.
[Guest]: Malayalam, per se, doesn't have an established epic culture.
[Guest]: We have myths and legends and then more contemporary forms of storytelling, but we don't have epic
[Guest]: as a form.
[Guest]: Tamil does, if you think of the Silapadikarams and the Manimegalas, where a big saga is told
[Guest]: and through that, the daily lives of people, the culture, the traditions, all of that is
[Guest]: interwoven into that.
[Guest]: So I think these things inform the way I think and write in English without necessarily informing
[Guest]: my voice or my style.
[Guest]: They just sort of expand my sense of the possibilities, if you will.
[Amit Varma]: Great.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take another quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side of the break, we'll continue chatting about this and that and
[Amit Varma]: that and this.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Guest]: We are back with a scene in the unseen, where normally Amit does questions and his guests
[Guest]: respond occasionally at rambling length like I just did until now.
[Guest]: But Amit, this time I want to reverse the thing and ask you a question.
[Guest]: It's funny, I have known you for the better part of 20 years.
[Guest]: We've been friends, we've collaborated, we've worked together off and on.
[Guest]: It occurs to me that your trajectory in your profession is exactly the opposite of mine.
[Guest]: I did a lot of random things and then kind of stumbled and tripped and fell into journalism
[Guest]: almost by accident, or maybe because there was no other option.
[Guest]: But you straight out of college, you decided to get into journalism, right?
[Guest]: And you picked cricket.
[Guest]: And then you started doing other things.
[Guest]: You became a fiction writer, you started playing poker for a living.
[Guest]: You were a blogger for a bit, then you went deep into the sort of writing that among other
[Guest]: things one or two best yet, you're a pioneer for India and the podcast thing, all of that.
[Guest]: It occurs to me that it's a rather funny arc, which which on the face of it defies logic.
[Guest]: So I was curious about how you got where you and how you how you Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So the 200th episode of the scene and the unseen was all me answering questions from
[Amit Varma]: others covering many aspects, including this arc.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I was just thinking when you were speaking about, I said, at some point,
[Amit Varma]: I hope, you know, Prem won't think otherwise, if I ask him to send me a photograph of his
[Amit Varma]: himself as a young man, because I really wonder what you look like.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that has kind of happened to me while I've been speaking to old friends
[Amit Varma]: on the show, like you right now, or Deepak Shenoy a little bit earlier, or Sonia Falero,
[Amit Varma]: who was also on is that you realize that these people are people you feel close to, right,
[Amit Varma]: there is a lot of affection, there is a lot of warmth, you've known them for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: And yet you don't really know them at all.
[Amit Varma]: That's that's sometimes the feeling I get that there's so much you don't know.
[Amit Varma]: And your question revealed some of that, because I didn't come straight into journalism, I
[Amit Varma]: spent a few years in music television, I, I worked for a few months in advertising in
[Amit Varma]: Delhi, I graduated in 94, I finished my BA literature.
[Amit Varma]: And then for a few months, I worked in Delhi in HTA, where I worked in a group called the
[Amit Varma]: Pepsi group HTA is today J. Walter Thompson, it was in the number one ad agency in the
[Amit Varma]: country hated advertising, came to Bombay work to channel V where quick and Morgan was
[Amit Varma]: just out.
[Amit Varma]: And that was the in thing.
[Amit Varma]: So I landed on a Friday called up their office, I said, you know, I'd like to kind of work
[Amit Varma]: with you.
[Amit Varma]: And on Monday, I had the job worked in channel V for a couple of years, two and a half years
[Amit Varma]: worked in MTV for two and a half years, tried a.com startup that failed partly because the
[Amit Varma]: NASDAQ crash happened in 2000, just as things were taking off, drifted into journalism,
[Amit Varma]: like my entrepreneurship efforts left me in a bit of debt, and I needed a job.
[Amit Varma]: And so I joined Sambit Bal at wisdom, we later went on to buy Cricinfo and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And Sambit was kind enough to cut a deal with the organization where they gave me a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a loan, which covered, you know, the amount of my debt, and they'd cut it out of my salary
[Amit Varma]: every month, eternally grateful for that.
[Amit Varma]: And just a great editor, like you spoke of how you only worked with Nikhil, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for me, Sambit is up there as an editor also, because, and we spoke about this in the window
[Amit Varma]: pane session, also how he nurtured so many talented young writers like Rahul Bhattacharya
[Amit Varma]: and Siddhartha Vaidyanathan, Chandra Haas, Rahul Bhatia, all of these people.
[Amit Varma]: So in enormous talent, but you know, we must not make the journalistic mistake of ascribing
[Amit Varma]: a post facto narrative on something that basically randomly happened, which is kind of what happened
[Amit Varma]: with me that everything was random.
[Amit Varma]: So the counterfactuals are, of course, interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And I just drifted from one thing to the other.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of that is, and it's interesting, I teach this course called the art of clear
[Amit Varma]: writing, where I talk about the link between clear writing and clear thinking.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of this journey happened because I wasn't a clear thinker.
[Amit Varma]: So I didn't really know exactly what I was aiming for, what I wanted to do, there were
[Amit Varma]: all these sort of confusions.
[Amit Varma]: And so I stumbled from thing to thing, which I enjoyed doing, I've spoken a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about this journey in that sort of in the episode that I did.
[Amit Varma]: But I think one of the things and I'll turn this back into a question for you.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the sort of realizations I had at some point, like, I think what happens
[Amit Varma]: is that there are two sort of transitions that I have seen.
[Amit Varma]: One is that moment where you realize you're not exactly young anymore, where you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're in your 40s, and you still behave like someone who's 25.
[Amit Varma]: And you think, you know, all of your future is ahead of you.
[Amit Varma]: And then you suddenly think what the fuck 20 years just passed, you know, while I was
[Amit Varma]: procrastinating or not doing stuff, and then one has to reorient oneself.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense that reorientation can also be painful, because there is a point where
[Amit Varma]: you realize that, let's get real here, you know, most of my dreams are not going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: But there's another reorientation that happens that makes us okay, which is an understanding
[Amit Varma]: that you would dreaming the wrong dreams anyway, that happiness doesn't come from achieving
[Amit Varma]: A or B or C, it comes one to take joy in what you're doing in an everyday basis, to kind
[Amit Varma]: of find those little joys, the things that you enjoy doing, like I get a lot of joy from
[Amit Varma]: these conversations, right?
[Amit Varma]: So even if, and that's something in and of itself.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that process of sort of reorienting in these multiple ways, of course, for me
[Amit Varma]: is sort of ongoing.
[Amit Varma]: But how has it been for you?
[Guest]: For me, I think there are two things that I can think of.
[Guest]: One is, I look at myself today, and I think, I'm not going to say it's my abiding fault,
[Guest]: or that it's a problem or a weakness or whatever, it is a complete lack of ambition.
[Guest]: And I've tried to figure that out.
[Guest]: And I realized that, you know, those eight years when between my dropping out of college
[Guest]: and between finding my feet, it was so hellish.
[Guest]: And it nearly drove me to taking my own life a couple of times.
[Guest]: And the one thought that I had in my head all that time was, somehow, I want that opportunity
[Guest]: to prove that I have what it takes.
[Guest]: Because when everybody around you is running you down and saying that you'll never amount
[Guest]: to anything.
[Guest]: And inside you, you know, that if you had that opportunity, you could do this, it becomes
[Guest]: a it becomes a terrible place to live in.
[Guest]: And so I came to Bombay, and I don't know my, my first day at Free Press, Mr. Kanapalli
[Guest]: called me into his room for an interview, and obviously, I had no degree or anything
[Guest]: to show him.
[Guest]: So he said, fine, I'll take you on as a trainee.
[Guest]: And after a month, I'll give you a test in English, which in a funny kind of way kind
[Guest]: of amused me.
[Guest]: But what I remember about that day is after that I was somebody, he called somebody into
[Guest]: the room and said, show him a table and chair where he can work.
[Guest]: And I went and sat down and suddenly I got up, ran to the loo and I threw up.
[Guest]: And I think it was the realization that all this time I had been living in this world,
[Guest]: inside my head, where all I needed was a chance to prove my point, or to prove that I had
[Guest]: what it takes.
[Guest]: And suddenly here was that chance.
[Guest]: And I think I was struck by the dread that I would fail.
[Guest]: And then the one justification I had for all the mistakes I had made till then, would also
[Guest]: vanish.
[Guest]: And I just barfed.
[Guest]: And as it turned out, some four days later, I was looking at the pages as they were being
[Guest]: made and Mr. Kannabali's editorial, there was an error of both fact and syntax, which
[Guest]: I corrected, and he wasn't there.
[Guest]: So I just took a call, I corrected it, I didn't know what was right and wrong at that time.
[Guest]: So next morning, I went to him and said, there was this problem yesterday, and I've corrected
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And he took a look at me and said, okay, you can go home now and come back in the evening.
[Guest]: So I was like, what is that about?
[Guest]: He said, you come in the evening, I'll let you know.
[Guest]: So I go back at about six o'clock, and he was waiting for me, he said, I want you on
[Guest]: the night shift and start making pages.
[Guest]: And straight away, he said, I don't think you need any tests or something.
[Guest]: And I think what happened in that moment was I realized I had what it took.
[Guest]: And that was it.
[Guest]: If you spend eight years locked inside of yourself, and only wanting to accomplish that
[Guest]: one thing, which is, just get that chance, just prove to yourself more than to your family
[Guest]: or to whoever, that you can do this.
[Guest]: And then you tick that box.
[Guest]: I was suddenly left with no more boxes to tick, and I still don't have any boxes to
[Guest]: tick.
[Guest]: I think now the only thing is, similarly, there's a dream which led to the starting
[Guest]: of Peeply.
[Guest]: Even before that, when I was in Yahoo, and to the extent that was possible, I bargained
[Guest]: for budgets to do, we had this thing called originals, where people went out and reported
[Guest]: at length on various stories that were not really chasing the headlines so much as narrative.
[Guest]: I remember we won a whole heap of Red Ink Awards for those stories that was with Nisha
[Guest]: and Gautam Jain.
[Guest]: And then Apti went out and did something called River Diaries, which is what got Paul's attention
[Guest]: in the first place.
[Guest]: And then we started Peeply with this dream that there is still both a market and a need
[Guest]: for deep, immersive journalism, journalism that looks not at what the headlines are.
[Guest]: So we said, look, if you're looking at the long term, India has about two, three problems.
[Guest]: One is the problem of water resources, basically an environmental problem, water is a central
[Guest]: to it.
[Guest]: But there is a lot of dominoes that then start to fall once you start interfering with the
[Guest]: water supply.
[Guest]: The second is a combination of healthcare and education, which is one of the things
[Guest]: that to my mind, is holding back this country's productivity in a good way.
[Guest]: One, we keep talking of the demographic dividend, and there's no way to capitalize on that dividend.
[Guest]: If the kids are not being given an education that is of some use to them in their life,
[Guest]: they're not productive, if they end up, you know, working in malls and stuff like just
[Guest]: to earn a subsistence living, it's what do they call it, disguised unemployment.
[Guest]: If that is the case, you're losing out on that.
[Guest]: And the third is what we call development, which isn't really, we are putting up these
[Guest]: structures here and there, but we're not connecting the dots at all, which is what Rahul Bhatia
[Guest]: was doing.
[Guest]: If you remember, he was talking about one factory that produces condensers, which is
[Guest]: required by another factory at 180 kilometers away.
[Guest]: And to carry this condenser across the distance of 180 kilometers takes almost a year, because
[Guest]: our roads are not equipped to deal with that kind of massive transport.
[Guest]: So these are not headlines, but these are issues that will ramify.
[Guest]: And funnily enough, for instance, Aarti, I remember, went to Sundarbans on one of her
[Guest]: early explorations.
[Guest]: And she came back and she talked to me and then wrote about this moment when she was
[Guest]: in this little boat.
[Guest]: And in the Sundarbans, by about five o'clock, you have this enormous mist that shrouds everything,
[Guest]: fog that shrouds everything.
[Guest]: You can barely see, if you hold your hand out in front of you, you can't see your hand.
[Guest]: And the boat suddenly veered, she nearly toppled off the boat.
[Guest]: And it turned out that right in front of her, the boatman had seen it in the nick of time.
[Guest]: There was a huge tanker coming towards them, no lights, no sound, no nothing.
[Guest]: And she was talking about what this means, the possibility, the Selar River is protected,
[Guest]: Sundarbans is a protected environment, it is a UNESCO project and all of that.
[Guest]: And here you had these massive tankers carrying things like fly ash, crude oil, and various
[Guest]: other extremely harmful products.
[Guest]: And she said, someday there's going to be a crash and soon enough, three months later,
[Guest]: there was.
[Guest]: And 350,000 liters of oil spilled into that thing and completely ruined that environment.
[Guest]: Subsequent to that, there have been at least four or five other tanker mishaps that I know
[Guest]: of, fly ash, fertilizer, all kinds of things have been dumped into that extremely sensitive
[Guest]: ecosystem.
[Guest]: So I believe that it is necessary to tell these stories, I believe that it is necessary.
[Guest]: And increasingly, you're looking at a media world where there is no space for this kind
[Guest]: of storytelling.
[Guest]: There is neither the ability nor the ability not of the individual reporter, but of the
[Guest]: management, let's say, to think of the necessity of all this and to find the ways and means
[Guest]: to make it happen.
[Guest]: There isn't the space, there isn't the time, and there isn't the inclination.
[Guest]: And because of this combination of factors, the most important stories of the day remain
[Guest]: untold or largely untold.
[Guest]: There are independent journalists who are on their own time going out and telling these
[Guest]: stories, people like Aarti or Priyanka Dubey or Bahadut and people like that, who are taking
[Guest]: the trouble, Prerna Bindra, for environment-related stories.
[Guest]: A lot of these people are doing it, but they're doing it despite the system.
[Guest]: And I think the only dream that remains is to create that system, which is what we try
[Guest]: to do with Peepli.
[Guest]: But convincing people that it is worth investing in, I failed at and I don't know how to turn
[Guest]: that around.
[Guest]: So yeah, that is to your question, it's kind of, in one sense, I have no ambitions.
[Guest]: In the other, I have this one, or at least in one sense, I have no personal ambitions.
[Guest]: I'm not, I have to do this particular kind of journalism or I have to write this book
[Guest]: or I have to do X, Y, Z, none of that seems to matter.
[Guest]: And it hasn't mattered since that day I told you about my first week.
[Guest]: But at a larger level, I suppose this is the one thing that that haunts me that I wasn't
[Guest]: able to make it work.
[Amit Varma]: You weren't able to make what work?
[Guest]: This project of Peepli or any, you know, variant of that.
[Guest]: But essentially, the idea of consistent beat reporting on the seminal issues, the issues
[Guest]: that will really make a difference to this country in the coming years, that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, let's talk about your time in journalism and journalism itself.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get there, I'm sort of interested in, I mean, I think if one was to rephrase
[Amit Varma]: the question as not as what ambitions may be and how you've recalibrated them, but what
[Amit Varma]: are you driven by?
[Amit Varma]: And what you seem to be describing at that early phase is that you're driven by the desire
[Amit Varma]: to prove that you're not a waste, that, you know, that you can excel and that comes to
[Amit Varma]: you on that day when you're put on the night shift and you don't have to do the English
[Amit Varma]: language test as such.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a personal drive fulfilled.
[Amit Varma]: And now what it seems to you and something that resonates with me is that there is a
[Amit Varma]: drive that is almost dual.
[Amit Varma]: One, it comes out of a passion for what you do, which is journalism and the writing.
[Amit Varma]: And two, it comes out of caring about these issues which have become important to you.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, the two of them come together, like again, for the benefit of my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: peeply at peeply.org was a project that Prem put together after he had left Yahoo, where
[Amit Varma]: he was a managing editor for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: And it was all about this deep, immersive, long-form journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned, you know, Rahul Bhatia's story there and there's also a famous FT story
[Amit Varma]: about how, I forget which those two cities are, South Indian cities, whether it's Chennai
[Amit Varma]: in Bangalore or Chennai in Hyderabad or whatever, I forget.
[Amit Varma]: But basically, at that time when FT did the story a few years ago, if you wanted to send
[Amit Varma]: goods from one city to the other, it was cheaper to do it via Paris than directly, because
[Amit Varma]: of all the shit that happens at state borders and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, another aside, you know, I finally ventured out to meet someone recently
[Amit Varma]: and I went with Rahul Bhatia to meet him for coffee at a nearby restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: And they had this bizarre thing that they had this large outdoor section where they
[Amit Varma]: were not allowing anyone to sit, but everybody could sit indoors, which was full of these
[Amit Varma]: shouty kids and air conditioning and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So I think people really need to think about this shit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it should absolutely have been the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: But my question is this, that, you know, obviously we see here a kind of a deepening of one's
[Amit Varma]: mental makeup in the sense that initially the driver is personal validation and I want
[Amit Varma]: to do this and I want to prove myself.
[Amit Varma]: And then later the driver becomes something else.
[Amit Varma]: And part of the reason the driver becomes something else is that you are forming a frame
[Amit Varma]: through which you look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: And that gets sharper and sharper as it kind of goes along.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, a picture of the world gets more and more high definition as you gather more
[Amit Varma]: and more dots to connect.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that process of worldview forming, because despite growing
[Amit Varma]: up in a generation after you till I was almost an adult, I did not know much about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: political theory.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know what left or right was.
[Amit Varma]: I had mildly left liberal inclinations in college because it seemed compassionate.
[Amit Varma]: It seemed a good way to go.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, extremely unformed and it's later in adulthood that I started reading
[Amit Varma]: much more and kind of figuring stuff out for myself.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process like for you of forming that frame through which you look at the world?
[Amit Varma]: You know, whether it is looking at politics, whether it is, say, looking even at journalism
[Amit Varma]: or society or the world around you?
[Amit Varma]: What was that like?
[Guest]: I think politics and society predate my involvement with journalism, largely because ours was
[Guest]: and whatever vestiges remain, it remains a hugely political family.
[Guest]: I did mention my dad's involvement with the RSS.
[Guest]: One of his younger brothers was a Marxist.
[Guest]: And there was a time when he was in hiding because he was supposed to be involved in
[Guest]: a murder case, political whatever.
[Guest]: And dad moved from the RSS to hardcore left, hardcore as in his thinking went left.
[Guest]: Mom was a diehard congressperson till the day she lost cognition.
[Guest]: I mean, I keep saying this in mom's religious worldview, there are four goddesses, Saraswati,
[Guest]: Lakshmi, Parvati and Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: So dinner, obviously, when the family gets together, dinner tends to be quite fun because
[Guest]: everybody's shouting at each other about, you know, their various political differences
[Guest]: are being had.
[Guest]: And growing up in the kind of family I did, it was difficult to escape.
[Guest]: Not that I wanted to, but culture and societal change for that period was so intrinsic to
[Guest]: our lives, that it became, again, staple fare of conversation.
[Guest]: So those things kind of came to me by default.
[Guest]: And my first few years in journalism were largely political journalism, or feature writing.
[Guest]: There was a brief foray into Bollywood because midday and therefore, it was needed, but these
[Guest]: were the kind of things that I would get to do.
[Guest]: It happened by accident, and after about five years of that, I think I mentioned this in
[Guest]: the windowpane session as well.
[Guest]: One, I was no longer taking a delight in it that I once did.
[Guest]: I was losing even the fandom for the sport.
[Guest]: Forget about the journalistic urge to view the next match and write about it.
[Guest]: Even that joy that I used to have as a fan was getting bleached out of me.
[Guest]: A lot of external reasons, you know them as well as I do the match fixing, and the growing
[Guest]: sense that you were seeing a Kabuki play rather than a cricket match, that what was going
[Guest]: on behind the mask was different from what we were perceiving in front of it.
[Guest]: And then I went back, after that, there was that period in New York, where working on
[Guest]: India abroad, it left a lot of time to myself to sort of reassess and like you said, reset.
[Guest]: And I realized that for me, until that point in time, I had done very little in terms of
[Guest]: environmental journalism or issue-based journalism.
[Guest]: It was mostly, unless you count politics as an issue.
[Guest]: It occurred to me that that was what I wanted to do, which is why when I came back, I did
[Guest]: a bit of that and then left Rediff, came to Yahoo, realized that I now had the levers
[Guest]: or at least some of the levers in my hand, as long as Yahoo was being run out of India,
[Guest]: I could work with the managing director on budgeting and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So I started giving increasing prominence for that kind of thing, going out for that
[Guest]: kind of stories as well.
[Guest]: I think that is how it evolves, that these are your personal preoccupations.
[Guest]: Look, I lived on land.
[Guest]: My grandfather being what he was, by the time I was four and five, I had a little spade
[Guest]: and a shovel and an axe of my own, scaled down to size.
[Guest]: And he would take me out into the fields pretty much every day.
[Guest]: And he would insist that I learn all the basics, how to dig a trench, how to chop down a tree,
[Guest]: all of that, or chop it up into firewood, all the basics, work with your hands and stuff.
[Guest]: And that was part of my formative years.
[Guest]: So it never quite left me, that sense of importance of land and how people and land interact with
[Guest]: one another.
[Guest]: So all of that was already marinating inside of me.
[Guest]: Then I met Aarti, who was hardcore into these issues.
[Guest]: I mean, she's a brilliant scholar with, I think, three postgraduate degrees to her name,
[Guest]: had a great job in Intel, quit all that, wanted to do this.
[Guest]: So her passion kind of, just when I was beginning to sense the first sparks of there has to
[Guest]: be more to it than quotidian political reporting, her coming along, just sort of took it up
[Guest]: another few notches.
[Guest]: Then Paul happened, and then it became a sort of continuous process.
[Guest]: Even today, I mean, I write a lot in my journals, which I don't know what I'll make of it at
[Guest]: some point.
[Guest]: But most of that writing is about these kind of issues.
[Guest]: Not what is happening in West Bengal or Kerala or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one thing, since I've known you, I've constantly been haranguing you about
[Amit Varma]: why you don't write books, like, for example, cricket, you know, the whole fascinating post
[Amit Varma]: John Wright's Hour of Ganguly period is so incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And most of what really went down and happened is not even in the public domain.
[Amit Varma]: And I used to keep nagging you, I think, please write a book about it.
[Amit Varma]: But there are so many books that you could really have written on just a variety of subjects,
[Amit Varma]: not just cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And you haven't done that.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you thought about?
[Amit Varma]: Like in my case, and I will hopefully write many books, but in my case, the fact that
[Amit Varma]: I haven't written 10 by now is really a lack of discipline.
[Amit Varma]: And it's got to do with those kind of personal feelings and not necessarily desire.
[Amit Varma]: But in your case, did you look at writing books as something that you would do?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that waxed and waned with time at different periods?
[Amit Varma]: How was that like, like one reason I think that, you know, I was thinking the other day
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, why should one privilege writing a book as necessarily the pinnacle
[Amit Varma]: of a certain kind of artistic or intellectual achievement, like it seems like a standard
[Amit Varma]: end goal?
[Amit Varma]: You know, why not a podcast?
[Amit Varma]: Why not whatever, you know, it's, it's, we kind of tend to think in these old structures
[Amit Varma]: of how we consume the world back in the day 30 years ago, but today, everything has changed.
[Amit Varma]: But was that ever a part of your makeup that I should write books?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it something you really didn't care about?
[Amit Varma]: And you were like, what is this Amit telling me again and again?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, you kind of answered your own question on my behalf, when you talked about
[Guest]: why privilege writing books as the pinnacle of intellectual achievement.
[Guest]: To the specific thing about cricket, I think we both know why I haven't written it.
[Guest]: For the simple reason that like you said, it's not in the public domain, because it
[Guest]: is not in the interest of either the players who are central to that era, or to the administration,
[Guest]: for a lot of things to to become public.
[Guest]: Almost all of what I know is from the players and the administrators themselves.
[Guest]: And I also know with a dead certainty that if I ever were to write about these things,
[Guest]: the very same people who took me aside, asked for my time, sat me down and told me things
[Guest]: will be the first to deny it.
[Guest]: At the end of it, I'm going to end up with a book that is universally denied.
[Guest]: And to what purpose, you know, I mean, if the principal players in this history do not
[Guest]: want the story to come out, I don't see the point of my doing it.
[Guest]: I don't think I have never felt that I have to write a book.
[Guest]: You and other friends, Nilanjana Roy, for instance, Kartika Nair, people keep talking
[Guest]: to me about it.
[Guest]: I played around a bit with that transcreation of Bhimsen, but that was more of a writing
[Guest]: experiment that I wanted to try out.
[Guest]: But for me, a book has to evolve from the story.
[Guest]: It has to be the other way around.
[Guest]: And I'm not talking fiction.
[Guest]: Fiction doesn't interest me.
[Guest]: I mean, I love reading fiction, but not necessarily writing it.
[Guest]: I don't even think in that direction.
[Guest]: Nonfiction though, yes.
[Guest]: And for me, it is, like I said, if you remember, we talked about that coastline exploration
[Guest]: that we were doing and which got truncated thanks to COVID and all the other issues.
[Guest]: But at some point, that is a book that I want to finish because you see the coastline and
[Guest]: you see beaches on which you played football or where you picnicked with your family when
[Guest]: dad and mom came down for the summer holidays and stuff.
[Guest]: And they have vanished.
[Guest]: They've literally vanished.
[Guest]: The beach does not exist anymore.
[Guest]: The water comes to the shoreline, to the road, for instance.
[Guest]: So that is one part of the story.
[Guest]: But then when you think of how it ramifies, the beach encroaching is fishermen disappearing.
[Guest]: Homes getting destroyed every single monsoon along that stretch from Trivandrum all the
[Guest]: way up.
[Guest]: Hundreds of homes are just being swept into the sea every single monsoon for the last
[Guest]: five, six years.
[Guest]: That is that many displaced families, that many displaced livelihoods.
[Guest]: To keep the sea from encroaching, you're going and mining stone from the Western Ghats, from
[Guest]: Idukki, from Kalpata and Sultansbatri and places like that.
[Guest]: And every year now for the last three years, you've had landslides in those places which
[Guest]: are killing people.
[Guest]: There is multiple ramifications across this.
[Guest]: And all these, let's say, economical, livelihood ramifications then translate into cultural
[Guest]: ramifications as well.
[Guest]: So there is a huge story with the coastline as its spine.
[Guest]: And to do the entire Indian coastline of 7,400 kilometers is an ambition that Aarti and I
[Guest]: have.
[Guest]: But just to do Kerala, it strikes me that what is happening environmentally in that
[Guest]: place and how it is ramifying into the social, the political and the cultural lives of the
[Guest]: people is a book worth working on.
[Guest]: And that's not an ambition that I've given up on at this point.
[Guest]: But again, that depends on do the basics first, which is go there, see what there is and then
[Guest]: see if the story is worth writing and if you're capable enough of putting it all together.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that requires funding.
[Amit Varma]: If someone listening to this wants to fund this, what do they have to do?
[Amit Varma]: Where do they have to go?
[Guest]: Well, talk to me.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: That's accessible.
[Guest]: So yeah, part of the thing I see, I can't talk to a VC on the regular lines of how many
[Guest]: page views will you get and how many you use will you get?
[Guest]: I can only talk in terms of, is this a necessary thing to do?
[Guest]: Is this something important that is not getting done right now?
[Guest]: And what will it take to do it?
[Guest]: And I'm not looking at huge sums of money, I don't think that is required at all.
[Guest]: We did that entire course, like 15, 20 days, one month and then another 15 days, another
[Guest]: month, 30 odd days, our budget was less than a lakh.
[Guest]: We stay in these small lodges, we walk a lot, we take public transport.
[Guest]: It's not like you're saying, okay, I need to be put up in these five star hotels and
[Guest]: I need tons of equipment and stuff.
[Guest]: But there needs to be somebody willing to do it because it is a good thing to do, not
[Guest]: necessarily because the ROI can be calculated on an Excel sheet.
[Amit Varma]: And I haven't found that person.
[Amit Varma]: So.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully you will through this episode.
[Amit Varma]: I have great hopes for that.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's kind of talk a little bit about journalism.
[Amit Varma]: And we've done this before.
[Amit Varma]: I think in 2017, we did this, if I remember correctly, we did an episode called the state
[Amit Varma]: of the media, where we, you know, spoke about where things are.
[Amit Varma]: And those days, my episodes are much shorter, though I think this was a one hour episode,
[Amit Varma]: but I don't quite remember.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I still can't quite get a handle on what the media will look like 10 years
[Amit Varma]: later.
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing that is clear to me is this couple of big changes.
[Amit Varma]: One is that there was a time where there was a consensus on the truth, because you got
[Amit Varma]: all your news from a bunch of singular sources, and that was pretty much it.
[Amit Varma]: And it was both good and bad.
[Amit Varma]: It was good because there was a limit to how much fake news could get through and you had
[Amit Varma]: what you had.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, two plus two is always equal to four.
[Amit Varma]: Today, you know, that's coming at you from disparate sources.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody constructs their own alternative realities.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense is good, because it means content creators like me can just create content.
[Amit Varma]: I am not dependent on a platform for publishing me.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have to conform.
[Amit Varma]: I can do my podcast as I want.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody's going to ask me, teen gun take you.
[Amit Varma]: I can do my newsletters as I want, which is kind of great.
[Amit Varma]: But and the other thing that's changed is that especially in the last 10 years with
[Amit Varma]: social media on our smartphones, that the way people discover, consume and filter information
[Amit Varma]: has changed.
[Amit Varma]: It is no longer the case that you will go to a destination that you'll, you know, pick
[Amit Varma]: up the Times of India in the morning or you'll go to even an India Uncut in the morning and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, as back in the blogging days, some people said they used to do and people don't
[Amit Varma]: go to destinations anymore.
[Amit Varma]: The news comes to them, they'll click on links on social media, or somebody will send them
[Amit Varma]: something on WhatsApp.
[Amit Varma]: So everything about the consumption has changed.
[Amit Varma]: Everything about, you know, at the demand end, it is all different.
[Amit Varma]: At the supply end, they haven't figured it out.
[Amit Varma]: They haven't figured out that, you know, or if they have figured out, they haven't figured
[Amit Varma]: out what to do about it, that the advertising model may be broken, that, you know, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of what was taken for granted, like the bundling of many things together in this big thing
[Amit Varma]: called the newspaper or the publication may not even be relevant anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know how those pieces are going to fall into play.
[Amit Varma]: At some point, the supply will fit into the demand and I don't know when it will happen.
[Amit Varma]: And even now, the landscape of how we consume information is changing so fast, that like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just this week, there was an episode out of a show that I produce, there's a show
[Amit Varma]: called Brave New World hosted by Vasanthar, which I produced for the IDFC Institute.
[Amit Varma]: And Vasanthar spoke to Jonathan Haidt.
[Amit Varma]: And Jonathan Haidt made an interesting point where he spoke about, I think the phrase he
[Amit Varma]: used was wisdom deprivation, where he said that, yes, today people have access to a lot
[Amit Varma]: more information.
[Amit Varma]: But most of us tend to consume something that has been produced in the last two or three
[Amit Varma]: days.
[Amit Varma]: You're always kind of in the moment, especially and this is more, this is a bigger concern,
[Amit Varma]: not when you take oldies like us, but when you take new generations who are still being
[Amit Varma]: formed.
[Amit Varma]: And the question is, what are they being formed by?
[Amit Varma]: And they are being formed by, you know, ephemeral shallow content, which is just coming out.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want to generalize and say everybody is like that kids generally today are obviously
[Amit Varma]: much smarter than us.
[Amit Varma]: They have a partly because of, you know, access, self pedagogy is much easier, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also, and I think the phrase John used for it was wisdom deprivation, and because
[Amit Varma]: things are just changing so rapidly that it is and because the demand side is continuously
[Amit Varma]: changing, while the supply side is still stuck in some paradigm of 12-13 years ago, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I can't put a finger on what the media landscape will look like 10 years from now
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you have been in media at the highest levels for all this time.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Look, I mean, the smaller point about the democratization of media is, I think, a wonderful
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: It's you talked about your podcast, but you could also have equally with with the same
[Guest]: amount of relevance talked about the writing group that you formed, which is now producing
[Guest]: content at a rapidly increasing both pace and quality, not just the quantity of stuff
[Guest]: that your cohort is turning out, but also the quality of stuff and, and the way they
[Guest]: are systematically broad basing their interests, so that they're covering more and more ground,
[Guest]: which is a good thing.
[Guest]: But as far as conventional media is concerned, I think it has fallen too deep into a trap
[Guest]: of its own making.
[Guest]: And instead of trying to climb out there reaching for a shovel, I think the genesis of the problem
[Guest]: was the early days of the internet when your monetization model depended on audience on
[Guest]: page views on on the number of, let's say, the amount of attention of a reader that you
[Guest]: could catch and retain.
[Guest]: So if your content was good enough to make a person spend x minutes on that site, and
[Guest]: to revisit that site multiple times a day, you had a good chance of making it with the
[Guest]: advertiser.
[Guest]: Two things have happened subsequently, one is that more and more media houses have come
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: Every media house operates on this Excel sheet model of what are our page views, what are
[Guest]: our unique users, what is our repeat visits and stuff.
[Guest]: In order to accomplish these goals without thinking of why you want to accomplish these
[Guest]: goals.
[Guest]: What the media houses are doing is churning out more and more irrelevant content.
[Guest]: For instance, one of the better run websites that we have in India today.
[Guest]: The other day, I saw this link on Twitter, this video went viral, blah, blah, something.
[Guest]: And I just clicked on it to see what the hell they were talking about.
[Guest]: And it was one of those random moments.
[Guest]: And I realized that what they had done was this was a video that had gone viral on Twitter.
[Guest]: Somebody had posted it.
[Guest]: All they had done was embed that Twitter in this page.
[Guest]: And that's it, gave it a headline and pushed it out.
[Guest]: Why would you do that?
[Guest]: It's already viral on Twitter.
[Guest]: You're hoping to write that virality for a few extra page views.
[Guest]: And the joke is, you haven't thought of what those extra page views mean in terms of revenue.
[Guest]: Somebody did put in even that little bit of effort to find that and embed it, right?
[Guest]: They haven't done the basic math of saying the more page views I produce, and the more
[Guest]: page views everybody around me produces, the less each page views value is.
[Guest]: So at a time when you used to sell what you call the CPM, cost per million page views,
[Guest]: when the CPMs were counted in dollars, today, they're not worth pennies.
[Guest]: So your basic unit of production, which is your page view, is increasingly irrelevant
[Guest]: in the marketplace.
[Guest]: And yet you're chasing that metric, and you're not only chasing that metric, you're actually
[Guest]: doing more and more of that.
[Guest]: You're desperate to meet these so-called monthly targets and stuff, right?
[Guest]: Now, having done all that, you are not clearly making money.
[Guest]: Therefore, your annual cycles are, okay, we have a lot of red ink, therefore lay off a
[Guest]: few more people.
[Guest]: Your quality comes down, the remaining people are put to the job of churning out more content.
[Guest]: The relevance of that content to the average consumer is therefore getting depleted.
[Guest]: And it's a vicious cycle, and you're not, at no point are you hitting the pause button.
[Guest]: You talked about, as an individual, the times that we reset ourselves, that moment when
[Guest]: we think, okay, what have I been doing, and why am I doing this?
[Guest]: And is this what I'm supposed to be doing?
[Guest]: And media, by and large, has not done that, nor have they explored potential.
[Guest]: It is not for lack of alternate revenue options, so much as the media is in the trap of thinking
[Guest]: that this is the only way.
[Guest]: In fact, I remember making a presentation when I was in Yahoo about how Yahoo could
[Guest]: be monetized.
[Guest]: And everybody in the room said, okay, brilliant ideas, blah, blah, blah, and nothing happened.
[Guest]: And then a friend of mine in another website, when I left Yahoo, he came down to Bangalore
[Guest]: and said, I wanted to talk to you about monetization, do you have any thoughts?
[Guest]: And I gave him two, three of these ideas, and he said, will you come and help us do
[Guest]: it?
[Guest]: I said, I'll give you the ideas, just do it.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter, because at that time, I was more preoccupied with people.
[Guest]: It didn't happen, years passed.
[Guest]: And I've had the same conversation and these exact same ideas, at least four times to my
[Guest]: recollection.
[Guest]: And at no point has anyone shown, they've all shown great enthusiasm for the thought,
[Guest]: but it does take an effort to say, okay, I'm going to stop doing what I'm doing today in
[Guest]: order to do this tomorrow.
[Guest]: And that they're not willing to do.
[Guest]: So you're ending up in a trap where your single biggest sponsor is the government.
[Guest]: It is the government advertising, the government, the personality's presence at your events.
[Guest]: These are your primary monetization models.
[Guest]: If that is the case, you're then captive to, I mean, you automatically sink to being a
[Guest]: propaganda outlet for whoever is in power that particular time.
[Guest]: And that's a trap from which you can't climb out of until you stop that dependence.
[Guest]: Now, as long as you are in that particular trap, the problem is you become less relevant
[Guest]: to the audience because propaganda, it's not subtle, it's sledgehammer stuff.
[Guest]: And people see it.
[Guest]: I mean, we talked about this, I think in the writing class episode as well, that people
[Guest]: are very, very good to spot fakes and the same way they're very good at spotting when
[Guest]: there is an agenda behind what is being written.
[Guest]: So you've now gotten into the self-perpetuating cycle.
[Guest]: And part of the problem is that the people who are sitting in positions of authority
[Guest]: in media houses do not spend the time to explore their own ecosystem.
[Guest]: They do not spend enough time to see what is working elsewhere and why it is working.
[Guest]: What model is adaptable to this country?
[Guest]: What is the model that is probably not used somewhere else, but will work in this country
[Guest]: because we have scale?
[Guest]: None of those questions even come up in these management discussions.
[Guest]: What does come up is how do we get 25% growth quarter on quarter?
[Guest]: In fact, in Yahoo, I actually asked that question when I was asked how I was going to ensure
[Guest]: 25% growth.
[Guest]: I said, the last quarter, these are the numbers we've done.
[Guest]: How much of it did you sell?
[Guest]: The guy didn't have an answer.
[Guest]: I did.
[Guest]: I told him you only sold 35%.
[Guest]: So what are we going to do with this 25% growth when you can't even sell what I'm producing
[Guest]: right now?
[Guest]: So yeah, the future of media is frankly in the media's own hands.
[Guest]: If they don't see the trap that they've fallen into and if they continue to dig deeper, pretty
[Guest]: soon you become irrelevant to the audience.
[Guest]: You made the point.
[Guest]: Increasingly, nobody goes to a website, right?
[Guest]: I mean, learn behavior for you, for me.
[Guest]: In the morning, you needed to catch up with news.
[Guest]: Therefore, you had one or two preferred news sources, whether it is Times of India, Hindustan
[Guest]: Times or Hindu, whatever it is.
[Guest]: But you went to that website at the time that you stopped actually reading the physical
[Guest]: paper.
[Guest]: You went to the website and you went through it.
[Guest]: You wanted to know about cricket.
[Guest]: Therefore, you went to ESPN, Cricket Info.
[Guest]: And similarly, you had certain specific interests.
[Guest]: So you had a set of about maybe 10, 12 bookmarks, which was the first thing that we did every
[Guest]: morning, cycle through those bookmarks and catch up with the world and whatever happened
[Guest]: while we were asleep.
[Guest]: Today, there is no URL that you type in and that tells you that there is no website that
[Guest]: has become of even remote relevance to us.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter.
[Guest]: I'm operating under the assumption that if it is important enough, somebody on social
[Guest]: media will be talking about it and I will find it.
[Guest]: And that is not because of the rise of social media.
[Guest]: People are putting the cart before the horse in that particular argument.
[Guest]: It is not the rise of social media that is making the newspaper irrelevant so much as
[Guest]: the newspapers made themselves irrelevant.
[Guest]: And therefore, people are turning to alternate sources of news or information.
[Guest]: For instance, why do your podcasts work?
[Guest]: Your guests talk brilliantly about a huge variety of subjects.
[Guest]: I mean, the last two guests, you had Dezala Wahab.
[Guest]: Before that, you had Annie Zaidi.
[Guest]: Before that, you had Deepak Chhenoy.
[Guest]: All three are entirely different.
[Guest]: The areas of expertise are different, the subject matter is different, right?
[Guest]: Why is all this not part of mainstream media?
[Guest]: If it is irrelevant, your podcast wouldn't work.
[Guest]: If your podcast is working, it does say that these are themes and topics and ideas that
[Guest]: a certain section of the audience is actually interested in.
[Guest]: They are willing to invest, what, three hours of time listening to all this?
[Guest]: I know media houses that would kill for three hours of your attention.
[Guest]: And advertisers would die to get that kind of time spent on a website.
[Guest]: So I mean, for newspapers to say, you know, social media has killed us and Facebook is
[Guest]: doing this to us and all that, sorry, you did it to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Marvellous.
[Amit Varma]: So there's lots there to unpack and I'll unpack some of it.
[Amit Varma]: But since you mentioned sort of the clear writing community, I'll quickly take a brief
[Amit Varma]: digression to tell listeners about that.
[Amit Varma]: So basically, I started the Scorsese Autoclear Writing in April last year.
[Amit Varma]: And I've, you know, I'm on my 11th cohort right now.
[Amit Varma]: And around the ninth cohort, the former students kind of got together and they formed this
[Amit Varma]: separate online writing community, which I am a part of, but not the Grand Poobah as
[Amit Varma]: it were, I'm just another member.
[Amit Varma]: And so are you, in fact, and it's voluntary, it's free.
[Amit Varma]: And it's only for people who've already done the course.
[Amit Varma]: So they kind of share the same frame of reference and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And they give each other prompts, exercises, we have this YouTube channel on which, you
[Amit Varma]: know, we've spoken to Prem recently, before that we spoke to Nilanjana Roy and Aakar Patel
[Amit Varma]: about writing.
[Amit Varma]: We have a newsletter at windowpane.substract.com.
[Amit Varma]: We have reading groups, book clubs for fiction and nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: And now they're talking about forming a film club as well.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of enthusiasm, a few hundred people, lots of action there.
[Amit Varma]: Now kind of getting back to why has this podcast taken off?
[Amit Varma]: And that's something I've thought about, because it caught me by surprise.
[Amit Varma]: When I started, I thought attention spans are shallow, you got to grab them in the first
[Amit Varma]: 15 minutes, first 15 seconds, don't do anything longer than 20 minutes, that was all bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: And it was all received wisdom that came from YouTube and may not even necessarily be true
[Amit Varma]: for YouTube anymore, because there are interesting new things happening there.
[Amit Varma]: But we can talk about that some other time.
[Amit Varma]: But one reason for this is that if you look at the media, you have in the past described
[Amit Varma]: the Indian media as being an inch deep and a mile wide.
[Amit Varma]: And that's exactly what it is.
[Amit Varma]: And it is like that for different kinds of incentives.
[Amit Varma]: One obviously is that if you look at news television, why is it so shallow?
[Amit Varma]: Why is it so shouty and screamy and in a race to the bottom?
[Amit Varma]: Because there are price caps on for example, subscribers, which means that most of your
[Amit Varma]: revenue has to come from advertising, you know, and that proportion of advertising revenue
[Amit Varma]: to subscriber revenue is incredibly skewed far more than any other country.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there's a race to the lowest common denominator.
[Amit Varma]: When you invest a lot in big media, you want your money back, you're racing for a lowest
[Amit Varma]: common denominator.
[Amit Varma]: So you keep it shallow, you can't afford to go too deep.
[Amit Varma]: And here's an interesting nuance here.
[Amit Varma]: What this means is not only that you cannot cater to a niche, what it also means is that
[Amit Varma]: you never even discover a niche, a niche doesn't know that it exists, because people aren't
[Amit Varma]: throwing things at the wall.
[Amit Varma]: And the wonderful thing about the internet and technology is that it empowers individuals
[Amit Varma]: to throw everything at the wall, I can do a four hour podcast, I can do a newsletter
[Amit Varma]: about whatever I can do my blogging in your case, smoke signals, in my case, India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: and niches form communities form, which is the wonderful thing about it.
[Amit Varma]: But the other very fascinating and deep point that you have made previously, which I just
[Amit Varma]: want to, you know, take our listeners through is you've pointed out that when you enter
[Amit Varma]: this death spiral, like we've spoken about how demand is one thing supplies another thing,
[Amit Varma]: what people want is not what the media is giving.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when that typically happens, the media starts losing money, what do they do when
[Amit Varma]: they start losing money, they won't sack the salespeople or whatever, they'll sack editorial.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a very telling phrase that I heard from you, where if you have less journalists,
[Amit Varma]: you will have more generalists, because you can't hire that many specialists.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore the work is spread around more among generalists who have to produce more
[Amit Varma]: work who have less time to work on stories, and the quality suffers like there's a phrase
[Amit Varma]: called Gelman amnesia, which is named after the physicist Murray Gelman, which basically
[Amit Varma]: means that, you know, whenever I read a story by a mainstream publication on a subject I
[Amit Varma]: know a lot about, could be podcasting or poker or even economics, sometimes I find that the
[Amit Varma]: story is rubbish, because I know the subject was so much depth and the generalist has probably
[Amit Varma]: worked on it for six hours and called up four people for quotes.
[Amit Varma]: But when I read the rest of the newspaper, on subjects that I don't know, I am trusting
[Amit Varma]: it as if it is gospel as if it is all, you know, and that's what is called Gelman amnesia.
[Amit Varma]: It's that you forget that this has happened that whatever subject you know about the newspaper
[Amit Varma]: has bungled up completely.
[Amit Varma]: Why would you assume they haven't bungled absolutely everything.
[Amit Varma]: And this causes a vicious cycle where there's a degradation in quality, and therefore the
[Amit Varma]: quality gets worse and worse and obviously then the reader who is no longer, you know,
[Amit Varma]: going to these mainstream media sites in any case, will, you know, the filtering effect
[Amit Varma]: will come into play and they'll read less and less of most of this garbage.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing that happens, which I think is, you know, outside of these contexts, is
[Amit Varma]: a way that in the past, because of either, you know, a lack of imagination, or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: individuals not being empowered enough in terms of individual consumers not being empowered
[Amit Varma]: enough is that we think in terms of packages.
[Amit Varma]: In newspaper, of course, it is the Times of India, you have a bunch of pages, you have
[Amit Varma]: politics news, sports news, opinion, blah, blah, blah, you put it all together.
[Amit Varma]: Education is like that.
[Amit Varma]: Education, we think in terms of packages where we are still in the 19th century paradigm
[Amit Varma]: that kids of the same age must be in the same class, and they'll be taught this package
[Amit Varma]: of subjects, history, geography, English, whatever, and it has to be this, nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: And we've been stuck in that equilibrium.
[Amit Varma]: And it is clearly not working, especially when you look at the Indian education system,
[Amit Varma]: where even though we have a jobs crisis, we have another crisis in that most people who
[Amit Varma]: are getting educated within our system, don't have the skills to be employable.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like this crazy dual sort of crisis that is happening.
[Amit Varma]: So there's this spoken of many things here, the just the kind of, do you have any thoughts?
[Guest]: Yeah, you made a point, which is central to this entire thing, you don't know a niche
[Guest]: exists until somebody comes along to service that niche, which is central to this entire
[Guest]: thing about your original question was around, you're not being clear where the media is
[Guest]: going or where it will be 10 years down the line.
[Guest]: This realization is what is the North Star that the media needs.
[Guest]: The media is servicing things in a byroad fashion, exactly like our education system.
[Guest]: It has gotten this template and it says, yeah, this is what the people want.
[Guest]: The question of is there something else that the people want that we are not aware of and
[Guest]: we're not giving and therefore we are losing readership or not gaining more readers is
[Guest]: never asked in a newsroom and never answered.
[Guest]: The other part of the issue is we talked about how it is not the salespeople, but the journalists
[Guest]: who get sacked.
[Guest]: The additional layer to that is that it is the senior journalists who get sacked because
[Guest]: they are the ones who are highest paid.
[Guest]: But the reason why they are seniors, they've spent some time in that profession, they've
[Guest]: acquired a knowledge base, that knowledge base belongs to that particular media company.
[Guest]: As long as say, for instance, I spend X amount of time working in newsrooms, being on top
[Guest]: of politics, building contacts and having a certain reservoir of both information and
[Guest]: the ability to acquire information quickly.
[Guest]: I know where to go, I know what dots to connect, and then you get rid of me.
[Guest]: You have lost that entire experience that you have actually spent money and time nurturing.
[Guest]: And increasingly, you are keeping the bottom layer of journalists there, kids who are just
[Guest]: out of school, who haven't had the time to build all this up.
[Guest]: And it is not just that you're keeping them, you're not giving them that opportunity to
[Guest]: build a knowledge base for themselves, because today you are expected to do a piece on the
[Guest]: West Bengal election about which you know nothing.
[Guest]: And tomorrow you're doing a piece on the Kerala election about which you know even less.
[Guest]: And you don't have somebody there to go and ask, you know, this seems to be somewhat odd,
[Guest]: where can I get that information from?
[Guest]: The journalist is googling and finding an article that somebody has written, which is
[Guest]: fairly ill informed in the first place, taking that as gospel, like you said, and basing
[Guest]: his or her, you know, analysis or piece on that bit of garbled information and garbage
[Guest]: is just perpetuating itself.
[Guest]: And then the media is wondering, why are we losing readership?
[Guest]: What is happening?
[Guest]: You're losing readership, because you're no longer relevant in any form or fashion to
[Guest]: the reader.
[Guest]: And you also made the point about how pathetic the education system is.
[Guest]: How many times in the last few years have we seen stories about, say, for instance,
[Guest]: the railways, posting a requirement for 1000 people to work on the tracks, and PhDs and
[Guest]: BAs and, you know, people with those kinds of qualifications applying by the hundreds
[Guest]: of 1000s.
[Amit Varma]: A simple...
[Amit Varma]: That's, in fact, been the case from my childhood, since I remember from the 1980s onwards, that
[Amit Varma]: you will have, you know, a vacancy for two PNs being announced and 600 PhDs will be among
[Guest]: the 300,000 people who apply.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, that's probably the most stinging indictment of both our education system and
[Guest]: at a larger level, the fact that as a country, as an institution, we're not thinking these
[Guest]: things through.
[Guest]: We keep talking about all these fancy concepts like demographic dividend and how we will
[Guest]: be the youngest nation of workers, but what workers?
[Guest]: And that question doesn't seem important enough for any kind of informed debate or discussion.
[Guest]: It doesn't seem important enough for any kind of policy framing.
[Guest]: And increasingly, these are questions that you don't even ask, because who the hell is
[Guest]: left in these newsrooms to ask them?
[Guest]: Funnily enough, I mean, just today, I was reading about how Pratap Banu Mehta is quipped
[Guest]: as a professor at Ashoka University.
[Guest]: You have very few voices today that are capable of understanding what is going on in our world
[Guest]: and articulating it in a way that makes sense.
[Guest]: I read everything that Pratap writes.
[Guest]: I don't always agree with everything that Pratap writes, but I read it because he takes
[Guest]: the trouble to think.
[Guest]: He has information.
[Guest]: He has that knowledge base.
[Guest]: And what he writes is based off of that.
[Guest]: You might disagree with the conclusions, but there is, again, to a point that you raised
[Guest]: earlier, there is a broad set of facts that both Pratap and I can agree on, as can you,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But look what happens to people like that.
[Guest]: They just get hounded out of all the public spaces that they currently inhabit.
[Guest]: And what is left are the people who, there's an India Today story written by the author
[Guest]: of a book on Modi about how the book was released in the presence of Modi and how Modi praised
[Guest]: the book.
[Guest]: That's media.
[Guest]: And, I mean, it's, I don't know, it feels sad because there's some vestiges left in
[Guest]: me of the idealism and the enthusiasm with which I entered this business.
[Guest]: Yeah, sure.
[Guest]: I stumbled into it by happenstance, but I loved it.
[Guest]: And today I'm looking around and saying, what's wrong with you guys?
[Guest]: You don't know how to do journalism anymore.
[Guest]: You don't even know how to make money off of this business anymore.
[Guest]: At least if you were doing that one thing, then fine.
[Guest]: I mean, you can say, look, you know, for all the fancy talk and all that, it is a business
[Guest]: and it needs to make money, but you're not making money either.
[Guest]: You're neither fish nor fowl in this case.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and, you know, the sadness that I feel is not so much for Pratap per se, you
[Amit Varma]: know, he's fine.
[Amit Varma]: He'll get by.
[Amit Varma]: What I worry about is the future Prataps, you know, that all the young people who might
[Amit Varma]: say to themselves that nahin yaar, woh toh anti-national hai, or that's not a direction
[Amit Varma]: to go in.
[Amit Varma]: Or if intellectualism is given a bad name, it's like, no, no, we don't want to be like
[Amit Varma]: them, ivory tower intellectuals and all of that, you know, and you aspire to different
[Amit Varma]: things and when you aspire to different things, you become a different person, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: a similar way, like after what happened to Munawar Farooqui, who, by the way, is a brilliant,
[Amit Varma]: brilliant comedian.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote a newsletter post where I've linked to some of his videos also, just brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: And after what happened to him, the worry is not about Munawar himself, though, of course,
[Amit Varma]: one is worried about him, but he is seems to be a brave, sensible kid.
[Amit Varma]: And he said he'll continue his comedy.
[Amit Varma]: The worry is about all the young budding comedians who might have thought along those lines or
[Amit Varma]: gone along those lines, even if they're not doing stand up, they might write satire, they
[Amit Varma]: might write literature, they might create different kinds of art, who are now saying
[Amit Varma]: ki nahi yaar, it's not worth it.
[Amit Varma]: And especially if they're the wrong identity, if they're born in the wrong religion, doubly
[Amit Varma]: more so saying ki nahi yaar mere liye toh it's not worth it, just make a good life for
[Amit Varma]: myself, leave all this.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that is unseen.
[Amit Varma]: All of that is, you know, what the chilling effect does in what it destroys is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sort of unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And here I'll ask you is that, you know, you have a lot of interaction with young people
[Amit Varma]: today, you've taught perhaps hundreds, if not thousands of journalism students, right?
[Amit Varma]: And what's your sense of the young people today?
[Amit Varma]: Do they, you know, is it because also while we see what is happening to the country, we
[Amit Varma]: also see a certain kind of idealism and awareness that happened after the CAA, when all those
[Amit Varma]: protests took place and all of that, we see that energy as well.
[Amit Varma]: So when you speak to young journalism students today, what is your sense?
[Amit Varma]: Because within the newsroom, I do not think that they really have role models, though
[Amit Varma]: I should not be too sort of at an individual level.
[Amit Varma]: I know many fine individuals who still work in journalism.
[Amit Varma]: But when they look at their big media houses and all that, they see people who don't really
[Amit Varma]: actually care about the journalistic output, their money is coming from events and media
[Amit Varma]: conclaves and all of that rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: What's your sense of this younger generation?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, should we be more hopeful of them than we could have been of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people in our time?
[Guest]: There's a good side to this and there's a bad side to this.
[Guest]: One of the things that I used to do, I haven't done this last year.
[Guest]: I don't know if I'll be doing it this year.
[Guest]: But every year, the Asian College of Journalism does this thing, where in the first two months
[Guest]: of each new year, academic year, they bring in people to do a session on various aspects
[Guest]: of journalism.
[Guest]: So I've been doing that.
[Guest]: And typically how it works is you're doing a presentation or a talk for about an hour
[Guest]: and a half, two hours, and then there is a Q&A.
[Guest]: And every single time I've been struck by two or three things.
[Guest]: One is every single year, I find the number of women entering this profession far out
[Guest]: versus the number of young men who are entering this profession.
[Guest]: The second is, I found uniformly intelligent kids.
[Guest]: And to get into ACJ, it is fairly expensive.
[Guest]: So these are people who can afford it, which by definition means that they could also afford
[Guest]: other types of education, other avenues, other streams to go in, and they have come into
[Guest]: the stream voluntarily.
[Guest]: They have a lot of passion.
[Guest]: There's a standing joke in ACJ that these sessions, they're supposed to end after about
[Guest]: two hours.
[Guest]: Typically, what happens is it starts at about 10 o'clock in the morning, one o'clock is
[Guest]: their lunch hour.
[Guest]: So these kids say, can you hang on till lunchtime and we can talk.
[Guest]: And so all the people who are sitting nicely, and there are about 200-250 of them each time,
[Guest]: the entire, all the batches come together.
[Guest]: They kind of hang around and they just have so many questions about what is this like
[Guest]: and what is that like, and what do you think of the future of the media and the economics
[Guest]: of it and the politics of it and all of that.
[Guest]: It goes on till one o'clock and then there will be this group of kids invariably who
[Guest]: will say, will you come and have lunch with us so we can talk some more.
[Guest]: And there are times when I ask them, what are your expectations from this profession?
[Guest]: To be honest, there are also some kids who think that a journalism degree is a passport
[Guest]: to the communications advertising stream.
[Guest]: But there is a significant number of talented, bright young kids who are coming in every
[Guest]: single year, which is a good part.
[Guest]: And they seem to have that same idealism that sparked previous generations.
[Guest]: They think that they can change the world.
[Guest]: They think that journalism is a profession that is worth being part of that.
[Guest]: I hate to use this word, but in some way, it is noble for want of a better word.
[Guest]: We heard this when we were young, right?
[Guest]: Journalism is a noble profession.
[Guest]: They still believe it.
[Guest]: And it is not a belief born of naivety.
[Guest]: They are clear-eyed about what is happening in the media business today.
[Guest]: But they still believe that it will not be the same tomorrow.
[Guest]: And then there is, because one of the things that happens is I give my email to whoever
[Guest]: asked for it.
[Guest]: So these kids invariably ask, and I give them the email, and some of them find jobs in mainstream
[Guest]: media.
[Guest]: And then there are these increasingly puzzled questions.
[Guest]: One kid actually wrote and then said, in your time, was it easy for you to go up to the
[Guest]: editor and ask for comment on what you had just done?
[Guest]: Because I'm not getting any feedback at all.
[Guest]: And that speaks to what you were talking about.
[Guest]: There are good journalists still in the newsrooms around the country.
[Guest]: But that old habit of mentorship, and you've been in both those places, right?
[Guest]: When you joined Cricinfo, you had a some bit to mentor you.
[Guest]: But you also mentored newcomers in your own turn, the other kids who subsequently joined
[Guest]: like Sid Vee and people like that.
[Guest]: That mentorship is gone.
[Guest]: So there is a growing disenchantment once you actually get into the profession.
[Guest]: And there is no countervailing positive to it.
[Guest]: There is no one making sure that that enthusiasm remains undiminished or that that fire that
[Guest]: they had is not banked, which is which is the sad part.
[Guest]: And all of this is based on say, one journalism school, there are plenty around the country
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: And they're all producing these young kids and who are getting into, I remember in Delhi,
[Guest]: for instance, there was a particular journalist from a website who was part of that workshop.
[Guest]: The first day she drafted a little note on the basis of what she had seen and heard in
[Guest]: old Delhi, she was pursuing a particular story.
[Guest]: And she condensed that into two paragraphs.
[Guest]: And Paul was the one who read it and he suddenly turned to me and Aarti and Don, we were sitting
[Guest]: and reading other people's submissions and said, I want you to stop what you're doing
[Guest]: and read this.
[Guest]: And we read it and I swear it blew our minds, it was that good.
[Guest]: And we called this kid and said, what do you do?
[Guest]: And what she does is do things like 10 things you should know today and, you know, little
[Guest]: compilations for that website.
[Guest]: And at the end of the course, she came and told us something that still stays with me.
[Guest]: She said, I didn't realize there was another way of doing journalism until I took this
[Guest]: workshop.
[Guest]: And now I'm not satisfied with what I'm doing anymore.
[Guest]: So there is that there is the ability.
[Guest]: Sadly, there is a tremendous amount of ability in the country, it just requires that somebody
[Guest]: have the willingness to tap it, to resource it and to actually, you know, let it happen.
[Guest]: You also made the point about Munawar Farooqui and I was just like you, I loved his videos.
[Guest]: And I think recently I saw one that he had made after he came out of jail, not the one
[Guest]: way he talks about his jail experiences, but another comedy thing and he's doing
[Guest]: I was actually recorded before, the ghost story, right, I was recorded before, but it's
[Guest]: lovely.
[Guest]: It's great.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's beautiful.
[Guest]: But I was also thinking of, you know, people who raise their voices against the various
[Guest]: inequities in the world, the activists, you suddenly get hit with sedition, whether it
[Guest]: is a Safoor Azadar or, you know, Naudeep Kaur or any of these places.
[Guest]: And you made the point about the number of young Munawar Farooquis, who are probably
[Guest]: not taking to this because, you know, I can't deal with this hassle.
[Guest]: And similarly, the number of people speaking out for those things that matter, that deserve
[Guest]: to be spoken about.
[Guest]: There is also this kind of effect on them as well, right, this daunting effect on this
[Guest]: is what will happen if you speak up for what is right and therefore you shut up and, you
[Guest]: know, earn your daily bread.
[Guest]: So yeah, it's, I think you use that downward spiral race to the bottom phrase in a similar
[Guest]: context earlier, but that's exactly what we are at right now, as a country, as a polity,
[Guest]: as a society, it's just a race to the bottom.
[Guest]: I was struck by something I saw on Twitter today.
[Guest]: Somebody had taken a photograph of a newspaper with two back to back stories, actually two
[Guest]: side by side stories.
[Guest]: The first story was that a court has decided to revive a panel or whatever to explore the
[Guest]: origins and the history of the Saraswati River.
[Guest]: And the other is that a court has decided to disband the pollution control mechanism.
[Guest]: And both of these are happening literally side by side in a newspaper, which is, for
[Guest]: me, a stark indication of where we are going.
[Amit Varma]: One wants to elevate the abstract, the other wants to ignore the concrete and we all know
[Amit Varma]: what happens when that happens.
[Amit Varma]: You know, a side which just strikes me when you spoke about, you know, with your tongue
[Amit Varma]: firmly in cheek about the noble profession of journalism, and it struck me that there
[Amit Varma]: is nobility and I'll tell you where the nobility is.
[Amit Varma]: I think the nobility comes from the individual, where the individual is driven by either the
[Amit Varma]: desire to observe things well and write about them well, or to bring about change by writing,
[Amit Varma]: or to speak truth to power, or whatever the case might be.
[Amit Varma]: The nobility comes from an individual journalist, it's not an inherent part of the profession.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what a media house is a business, you got to make profits, all of that is there.
[Amit Varma]: But journalists can individually be driven by whatever they're driven by.
[Amit Varma]: And then that drive will show in their work.
[Amit Varma]: And if good work is enabled, which it is not being, listicles are being enabled now.
[Amit Varma]: But if good work is enabled, then good journalism will result, which will show in the bottom
[Amit Varma]: line, because it is not true that people just want listicles and they don't want deep information.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, this podcast alone is sort of affirmation of that, that people crave
[Amit Varma]: deep content everywhere, they crave knowledge, they don't want to be condescended to, they
[Amit Varma]: don't necessarily want to be told, oh, these are 10 interesting things about Prem Panikkar,
[Amit Varma]: listicle, you know, and there aren't enough people giving them that depth.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that once we kind of get through this period of time where, I mean, I hope
[Amit Varma]: young entrepreneurs listening to this, actually figure out ways of solving this problem, that
[Amit Varma]: the way we consume news and information and knowledge is so different from the way it's
[Amit Varma]: given to us.
[Amit Varma]: There are so many gaps to be bridged.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I think both of us are too old to do much else but write and create the
[Amit Varma]: kind of content we do.
[Amit Varma]: But some young person should come forward and maybe fill this gap.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I've spoken to you for, you know, just upwards of three hours, I don't want
[Amit Varma]: to hold you anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing is, we haven't even touched on cricket.
[Amit Varma]: So all the cricket fans will click on this saying, oh, Amit and Prem talking about cricket,
[Amit Varma]: this is heaven.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of three hours, they'll be like, give us our money back and we'll be like,
[Amit Varma]: what money?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, we can talk about cricket some other time and writing, of course, we have
[Amit Varma]: spoken about in our windowpane session, which will release in three days.
[Amit Varma]: You've already spoken about what kind of drives you, the kind of long form journalism you
[Amit Varma]: want to do, the kind of issues you want to highlight.
[Amit Varma]: But you've also, through this period of time through the 63 years, seen a country that
[Amit Varma]: changed incredibly radically, like what others will read about in the abstract you have experienced
[Amit Varma]: in the concrete as it were, at this present moment in time, you know, what gives you hope
[Amit Varma]: and what gives you despair when you think about where our country is going?
[Guest]: What gives me hope is the time that I spend with ordinary people who, in those famous
[Guest]: words live lives of quiet desperation.
[Guest]: There is a there is an unwillingness or they just don't ever let go.
[Guest]: They don't they don't lose that in a sense of it's not just that they keep struggling
[Guest]: and they keep, you know, surviving by the thinnest of margins, it is that there is still
[Guest]: a joy in them, there is still a glow in them, there is there is happiness and they still
[Guest]: are able to take pleasure in the smallest of things, share a laugh, share a cup of tea.
[Guest]: They're not you look at what is happening and you even wonder how they managed to keep
[Guest]: their spirits high, but they do and this this is across the gamut, right?
[Guest]: I mean, I've sat and had arek with fishermen in a place called Adimalathura and we had
[Guest]: a brilliant night, they were telling stories and laughing and the women folk joined in
[Guest]: and the kids are sort of hovering around.
[Guest]: But the thing that most interested me was the next day, some of these fishermen went
[Guest]: out fishing, they came back, the net was half empty.
[Guest]: The total catch was sold for 150 bucks that had to be divided into seven shares.
[Guest]: And yet, are we meeting this evening was the first thing they asked when they saw me, that
[Guest]: gives me some kind of hope that that the people haven't given up that the people still have
[Guest]: the habit in them to not just somehow survive.
[Guest]: But in their own fashion, in our own fashion, to still smile against the odds and to still
[Guest]: survive and what gives me despair is that with this wealth, this human wealth that we
[Guest]: have, we are burdened by people who purport to govern us.
[Guest]: And I'm not talking just at the central level.
[Guest]: I'm talking right across the country at every possible level, the politicians, the bureaucrats,
[Guest]: the heads of institutions, etc., who do not realize this wealth and who do not realize
[Guest]: that tapping into it is the single biggest way to sort of lift everyone up.
[Guest]: That they are busy playing politics with no defined goal in sight.
[Guest]: I mean, you have a party that continuously supports election results and takes power.
[Guest]: I would understand that if having once got power, they have an agenda to do something.
[Guest]: But that has been completely missing.
[Guest]: So on the one hand, you have people who are surviving despite the system.
[Guest]: And on the other hand, you have a system that seems completely oblivious.
[Guest]: And right there, you have both extremes of the spectrum, right, you have hope and you
[Amit Varma]: have despair.
[Amit Varma]: Very moving words.
[Amit Varma]: Prem, thank you so much for your wisdom.
[Amit Varma]: It's a privilege to have you on the show, but more than that, it's a joy to be able
[Amit Varma]: to have such a conversation with you.
[Amit Varma]: And I hope we can do this maybe once every six months, just get together on the show
[Amit Varma]: and just gab about stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, thanks a lot for coming and all the best with your upcoming projects.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest]: I mean, more than coming on the show, which I absolutely love doing, I actually wish that
[Guest]: we could go back to that time when we used to hang around in each other's homes.
[Guest]: Because it's not just that it was a bunch of friends hanging around, right?
[Guest]: So many things will be talked about and it was enriching.
[Guest]: And I seriously miss that.
[Guest]: Maybe one of these days you can think of expanding the podcast into a sort of, you know, reunion
[Guest]: thing with multiple people or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what the answer is, but yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually a good idea.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, man, let this bloody time get over and I'll come and I'll hang out in your home
[Amit Varma]: for so long that you'll have to kick me out.
[Guest]: See you, Prem.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Guest]: We have a guest room.
[Unknown]: See you.
[Unknown]: Take care.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the show notes, which has links
[Amit Varma]: to much of what we discussed.
[Amit Varma]: My windowpane session with Prem, where he talks much more about writing, will be released
[Amit Varma]: later this week on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Prem on Twitter at Prem Panikkar.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.